The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Manatitlans, by R. Elton Smile

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: The Manatitlans
       or, A record of recent scientific explorations in the
       Andean La Plata, S.A.

Author: R. Elton Smile

Release Date: May 16, 2017 [EBook #54733]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MANATITLANS ***




Produced by Richard Tonsing and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)









                            THE MANATITLANS;
                                  OR A
                                 RECORD
                                   OF
                        SCIENTIFIC EXPLORATIONS
                                 IN THE
                         ANDEAN LA PLATA, S. A.


                            R. ELTON SMILE,

                             PRO-SCRIPTOR.


                             Buenos Ayres:
                  _Calla Derécho, Imprenta De Razon_,
                                 1877.




                            U. S. Copyright

                                   BY

                            ELTON R. SMILE.




                               DEDICATED

                                  AS A

                     MEMORIAL TRIBUTE OF AFFECTION

                    TO THE EVER PRESENT ANIMUS OF MY

                PARENTS, SISTERS, MRS. HIRAM HOLLY, AND
                          MRS. SOPHIA VISCHER.

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                                CONTENTS


             PREFATORY INTRODUCTION. BY THE HISTORIOGRAPHER
             CHAPTER I.
             CHAPTER II.
             CHAPTER III.
             CHAPTER IV.
             CHAPTER V.
             CHAPTER VI.
             CHAPTER VII.
             CHAPTER VIII.
             CHAPTER IX.
             CHAPTER X.
             CHAPTER XI.
             CHAPTER XII.
             CHAPTER XIII.
             CHAPTER XIV.
             CHAPTER XV.
             CHAPTER XVI.
             CHAPTER XVII.
             CHAPTER XVIII.
             CHAPTER XIX.
             CHAPTER XX.
             CHAPTER XXI.
             CHAPTER XXII.
             CHAPTER XXIII.
             CHAPTER XXIV.
             CHAPTER XXV.
             CHAPTER XXVI.
             CHAPTER XXVII.
             CHAPTER XXVIII.
             CHAPTER XXIX.
             CHAPTER XXX.
             CHAPTER XXXI.
             CHAPTER XXXII.
             CHAPTER XXXIII.
             CONCLUSION.




                        PREFATORY INTRODUCTION.
                         BY THE HISTORIOGRAPHER


In the following record of the explorations of the Teutonic corps of the
R. H. B. Society of Berlin, dispatched for the classification of
parasitical animalculæ peculiar to the vegetable productions of the
tropics, I shall confine myself exclusively to the revelations of the
day until the culmination of the corps discoveries, and then to
Manatitlan dictation, either direct or through the medium of thought
dictation.

The discoveries, as verified, will undoubtedly tax “public credulity” to
its utmost stretch; but as the absorptive power of human instinct for
the marvelous is unlimited in its superstitious gullibility, it will
peradventure receive—with perhaps an awkward spasm from the novelty of
goodness—the practical experience adduced as worthy of disputatious
consideration. Still we feel assured that there is a reasonable minority
who will adopt the practical suggestions with joyful avidity. The facts
related—although at present stranger than the instinctive fictions
projected from the unreason of the stomach’s rule—will prove, to the
affectionately disposed, of easy reconciliation with healthy digestion,
and in every respect worthy of universal adoption by our race. Assuming
the privilege of narrative relation in recording the progressive events,
I shall only advert to the leading adventures of the scientific corps
while en route toward their ultimate field of exploitation. But while in
progress shall endeavor to render the characteristic peculiarities of
the members sufficiently conspicuous for the clear exposition of their
national traits, that the reader may realize the obstacles opposed, in
degree, to their assimilation with the practical teachings of the
Manatitlans demonstrated by Heraclean example.

Lucenhouck, in prophetic forecast, says, “Man, in the arrogance of his
pride, believes that he is of a race separate and distinct from the
lower orders of the animal creation. Assuming attributes of deity he has
constituted himself arbitrator of his own destiny. Yet, with all his
affectation of superiority, there is an approximation in his form and
physical conformation that distinctly declares his relationship to the
simia species; among which there is as great a variety in form and
racial intelligence as with those of the genus to which he stands
confessed. With the full development of microscopical power, future
generations will learn that the wonders of Creation are beyond present
conception, and that well defined organic humanity may yet be revealed
on the utmost verge of atomic divisibility.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                            THE MANATITLANS.




                              BOOK FIRST.




                               CHAPTER I.


In the month of January, 187-, M. Hollydorf was selected to conduct an
exploring corps of the R. H. B. Society to the head waters of the
Paraguay and its tributaries, for the purpose of observing the habits
and classifying the different species of animalcular life native to the
trees and plants appertaining to those regions. The Royal Society had
supplied him with able assistants, and the most complete set of
instruments ever constructed for botanical or other research in the
fields of natural science. Among the instruments of recent invention,
was one of Lutsenwitz’s solar reflecting microscopes, especially
designed for field explorations. This was of the highest concentrated
power yet attempted by that artist,—the intensity of its magnifying
capacity being capable of showing the facial contortions of the most
minute animalculæ. Attached to the focal platform was one of
Phlegmonhau’s highest grade of responsive tympanums, with reflecting
auricle for magnifying the articulation of sound. The corps arrived at
Montevideo on the first day of April, and was fortunate in finding a
small trading steamer, under neutral colors, ready with quick despatch
for a barter voyage up the Paraguay and its tributaries, without a
specified port of final destination.

The captain was sole owner, and proved to be a man of rare intelligence,
which had been cultivated by travel and study. To his love of adventure
was added a strong amateur predisposition for the pursuits of natural
history. These qualifications led to a speedy agreement, with
conditional arrangements for a charter of the steamer open to variations
suited to the requirements of the corps.

                  *       *       *       *       *

On the 15th of April the members of the corps, instruments, camp
utensils, and travelling gear, were safely stowed on board the little
steamer _Tortuga_,—a name that implied slow progress, which to our
satisfaction her speed decried. At eleven A. M., having bid farewell to
our newly acquired friends, we left the anchorage with their “Good
speed,” and after threading her way among the vessels in the roadstead
the little steamer puffed her way up the broad expanse of the La Plata
estuary. The balance of the day was occupied in arranging instruments
for river observations, the while listening to praises lavished by the
captain upon the “worthy” qualities of his little propeller, of which he
was the architect and builder. During the evening he regaled us with
incidents of his life in California and the East Indies. His adventures
in California received occasional illustrations from a genial individual
introduced as Padre Simon, the prefix having been conferred—as we
afterwards learned—from his zealous support of the Catholic dogmas,
theoretically. As the padre was eventually enlisted in our corps, we
will foreshadow some of his peculiar characteristics. In form he was of
medium height, with a rotund outline visibly inclining to jovial
obesity; his face was in-dyed with a complexion blending with the Roman
auburn of his hair, which gave a warm glow to his expression when
lighted with a smile. In the first generation of descent from Irish
parentage, he retained the full impression of inconsistency in the
practical adaptation of his habits to the faithful index of goodness
ingrafted from the maternal stock. Guileless in thought, when free from
temptation, he possessed a ready facility of excusing his habits of
excess with the plea of saving grace administered under the seal of
confession. With this hint, in forecast of development, we will proceed
in the relation of events transpiring during the river voyage.

On the morning of the 21st of May, after having been subjected to our
full share of vexatious delays, incident to the provincial _poco
pocoism_ of the guarda and custom-house officials, the steamer gained
the river post of Santa Anna on the Pilcomayo, two miles above its
mouth. At Santa Anna they found the well-known American naturalist,
Diego Dow, waiting for an opportunity to obtain sufficient aid to
attempt the exploration of the Pilcomayo as far as the reputed
settlement of Tenedos, which rumor located on a confluent stream rising
and flowing eastward through the valleys of the Andean spur that reached
into central La Plata.

The ultra-savage disposition of the wandering tribes on the banks of
these rivers, having defeated every previous attempt made to establish
trading-posts, but few had been found willing to incur the hazard
proposed by Mr. Dow. Even the indomitable Jesuits had been foiled in all
their endeavors to conciliate the Indians in degree sufficient for the
establishment of missions preliminary to their subjugation.

The magnet of Mr. Dow’s desire had been drawn thitherward by the reputed
existence of a walled city inhabited by a white race of great beauty. He
considered the report sufficiently well authenticated to warrant the
adventure of his life for its discovery and relief from the constant
siege to which it had been subjected by the savage tribes from time
beyond date. His chief authority, which had incited him to engage in the
emprise, was his Auraucanian servant, who had, in his wanderings and
progress northward, served in an Indian marauding expedition, which
invaded the valley of the city for the purpose of lifting the cattle of
the inhabitants, who were in seasons of drought obliged to protect them
while feeding beyond the walls. As Indian forays were expected, the
herds were well guarded by shepherd escorts, whose persons were safely
protected with defensive armor, so that with the exception of the face
the other parts of the body were proof to the poisoned arrows. In
addition they were armed with a bow which in their practiced hands sent
the arrow sure to its mark far beyond the range of their savage foes’
weapons, so that in the open valley they were safe. Besides, their
tactics embraced so many precautionary variations that the Indians were
almost invariably decoyed and blinded from real intention. These feints
caused the savages to become over wary, never venturing an attack unless
with the advantage of overwhelming numbers. The party with which
Aabrawa, Mr. Dow’s servant, was engaged, met with a severe repulse that
indisposed them to renew the attempt, notwithstanding an opportunity was
offered on the succeeding day. So well managed were the citizens’ plans
of protection that they rarely lost either men or cattle, and without
being aggressive frequently administered well merited punishment upon
their foes, who were inspired with wholesome fear from a superiority so
manifest in deadly effect. Unable to cope with their white antagonists
in the open field, they, with constant wariness peculiar to the savage,
neglected no opportunity to harass, hoping at some time with constant
worrying to catch them off their guard. The cause of this implacable
hatred was hereditary, reaching, as Aabrawa learned, far back to a time
when the forefathers of the citizens abused their supremacy by enslaving
their Indian benefactors. The Indians having surprised and overcome
their oppressors, a remnant of the whites obtained refuge in the present
city, which had since been kept under constant espial. As the city was
overlooked from an adjacent height, but little passed in the streets
unknown to the besiegers, who were quick to discover any relaxation of
vigilance; and whenever from pestilence or other cause it did occur,
couriers were dispatched to summon aid from distant tribes.

Curiosity and love of exciting adventure had enlisted the members of the
corps in favor of aiding Mr. Dow’s projected enterprise, and through
their continued solicitation, M. Hollydorf consented to waive the strict
interpretation of his commission, designating a particular field of
operation, by using his discretionary power in favor of the proposed
scheme for raising the siege of the beleaguered city. Captain Greenwood
without hesitation tendered the aid of his steamer, and being one of
those peculiar persons who are accustomed to take the head of time by
the forelock, he immediately commenced the precautionary labors to
protect his vessel from the wily tricks of surprise practiced by the
savages. The commandante of Santa Anna, being well acquainted with the
methods of attack that led to the defeat of the various expeditions
directed against the Chacas, proved of great use in suggesting
precautions. The chief dread arose from the poisoned arrows of the
savages, which inflicted incurable wounds, adding to death the horrors
of lingering putrefaction. The fears anticipated from this source were
relieved by the confidence inspired through the energetic character of
the captain, whose experience with the superior cunning of the North
American Indians prepared him to cope with the lower instincts of their
southern congeners.

                  *       *       *       *       *

On the morning of the 23d of May the _Tortuga’s_ bow was turned against
the swift middle current of the Pilcomayo’s bayou expanse, then at its
height from the copious contributions of the rainy season in the high
lands and mountain sources of its tributaries. Night still found us in
the broad sea of waters, baffled in search of the interior mouth which
was made more difficult from the confluent branches uniting with it near
its Paraguayan embouchure. The commandante, anticipating the difficulty
likely to be encountered, had been particular in giving directions; but
although strictly followed, from a calculation of the steamer’s speed,
twice the distance had been run without discovering the described
landmarks. Uncertainty was rendered still more uncomfortable by the
shallowing of the water, showing plainly that we were inland from the
river’s channel. At midnight, while anchored, a hurricane, heralded by a
thunder-storm, made the waters seethe with its force, causing our little
craft to careen and bob with a politeness to the gusts that impaired our
confidence in its self reliance. Padre Simon declared that the lightning
set his teeth on edge, prompting him from its dazzling flashes to pray,
but that the thunder so startled and confused him that he was unable to
think, and as a dernier ressort was obliged to drink. This remedy
finally rendered him proof to the best efforts of Jupiter Tonans; but on
waking in the morning he complained that he could still hear the roll of
the thunder in his head.

On the morning of the 24th the sun rose bright and clear in a cloudless
sky, compensating with its splendor the discomforts of the night; its
reflected light glancing upon the waters discovered far to the south a
broad ripple, indicating the sought-for channel. The river’s stream was
soon gained, and followed in a southwesterly course until the river’s
limits were defined by partially submerged trees growing upon its banks.
Having at Santa Anna filled every available portion of the vessel with
fuel, sufficient for a run of four days, the boat was enabled to keep on
her course under a full head of steam, without anxiety from the dull
prospect offered for replenishing.

May 25th, at sunrise, after a good night’s run, we discovered a headland
above the surface of the water covered with fire-scathed trees, from
which the captain, for a surety, concluded to add to his diminished
supply of fuel. The labor of taking in wood from this source was by no
means pleasant, but the sailors with good-will made the “virtue of
necessity” cheerful with songs and jokes, the “passengers,” suitably
clothed, contributing with the zest of energy their labor for its
stowage, so that by eight o’clock we were again under way. With the
exception of this wooded bluff nothing but sky, water, and foliage had
met our eyes since leaving Santa Anna, the monotonous compound making us
well content with cabin associations.

On the 28th at sunrise, our ears were gladdened with the cry of “Land
ho!” Rushing on deck, with the expectation of a greeting from well
defined banks, we were disappointed, as the contrasted elements of the
previous day still prevailed. Seeing that we were a little inclined to
be vexed, at what we considered to be an ill-timed joke, the man at the
wheel, an old river navigator, pointed to a mud bank that closed our
view with the bend of the river, at the same time directing our
attention to the eddy cast from it far out toward a line of trees on the
opposite shore. From these indications he assured us that in a half
hour’s time we should hear the songs of birds to make us lively.
Doubling the muddy cape we were greeted with the screams of parrots,
while other birds of gay plumage were crossing and recrossing the river
singly and in flocks, causing, in apparent salutation, a lively line of
demarcation between the land enclosed current and the smooth waters of
the flood below. The welcome sight raised our spirits into a sympathetic
mood of song, which was unfortunately too nearly allied to the screaming
discord of the parrots to evoke other than a mirthful disposition for
repartee which expended itself in humorous comparisons, favoring the
advent of genial omens.

Mr. Welson, a prominent official of the Panama Railroad Company, had
accepted the freedom proffered by the steamship lines plying between the
maritime cities of the eastern coast of South America, for his
recuperative vacation of three months, and on his arrival in Montevideo
had been induced by Captain Greenwood to extend his voyage up the river.

A Scotsman by birth, he possessed in an eminent degree the predilection
of his people for dry, caustic humor; and in his position of commercial
agent had cultivated the art of extracting fun from the vagaries of
migrating humanity in their transit across the isthmus. Scientific
whimsies were especially adapted to his quizzical vein, and a happier
combination of material could scarcely have been conjured for his
entertainment, than he found on board of the _Tortuga_. Padre Simon was
his especial favorite as a stimulating provocative. Won by his naïve
simplicity, he had soon interested himself to learn the object of his
river voyage, with the intention of rendering him assistance. Greatly to
his surprise the padre informed him that he had no other expectations in
visiting Entre Rios than the chance one “of hitting an opportunity to
make a strike.” Amused with his vernacular, and the easy carelessness of
his manner, which seemed to defy disappointment, he was delighted to
discover his growing fondness for polemical disputations, which was
gratified by a kindred disposition cultivated by Dr. Baāhar, the
naturalist of the corps. On the steamer’s arrival at Entre Rios, the
port of his destination, the padre’s thoughts were absorbed in the
dogmatic discussion of the soul’s material identity with the body after
the resurrection, so that he gave no heed to the frequent repetition of
the name of the town. Aware of his total abstraction from all thoughts
and anxieties connected with the business responsibilities of life,
necessary for material sustenance, Mr. Welson connived with the doctor
to hold him in argument until after the steamer’s departure, well
assured that no material harm could arise from the derangement of plans
so lightly impressed as to give place to chimerical argument. For a
characteristic illustration of the disputants’ peculiarities we will
give the burden of their colloquial subjects of exposition.

_Padre._ “My conscience’ sake alive, man! Why, you might as well set us
down as beasts at once, as to argue that in resurrection we shall assume
the form of animals whose habits we most affect in life! Surely your
naturalistic learning has run mad with your orthodox catholic ideas,
for, upon my soul, they are rank with transmigration, and if confessed,
you would be denied absolution by every ecclesiastic in the Christian
world. Look you! the very fact, if admitted, would controvert all that
we hold sacred. Why, man, it would render absurd our reliquary faith in
the efficacy of sainted bones and vestments for healing the sick and
lame, for the marrow-bones of swine and the hair of dogs would hardly
serve to enlist belief in the Christian doctrine of divine
transubstantiation?”

_Dr. B._ “As we claim that reason has been bestowed as an endowment to
distinguish us in reality from the brute creation, its possession
presupposes preordination of intention in decree for its use. Now, if
you will devote your share of this human endowment to the demonstration
I am about to give of cause and effect, you will not fail to perceive
the distinctions upon which our faith is founded. Humanity possesses
omnivorously, in its varieties of genera and species, all the habits of
the lower orders of the animal creation in their separate
representation! But superadded to this resemblance in the community of
instinct, man has a discretionary power inherent with his endowment of
reason, which enables him to profit by experience in shaping his course
for the avoidance of consequent evils which follow from the
transgression of natural laws. This power presupposes accountability
that directs itself to Creative Cause. Upon this innate feeling of
responsibility, impressed by repentance from transgressions, and joys
imparted from adherence to the monitor indications of our superiority,
man has founded his religious distinctions of vice and virtue. In
furtherance of this natural division man has volunteered to represent
vice, and woman, unprejudiced by his influence, would have naturally
assumed the role of virtue in truthful vindication of her vocation as
the mother of our race. Now, as you well know, it is impossible to
harmonize vice and virtue, even with the instinctive coalescence of the
sexes? Hence, as you must acknowledge, there will be a constant struggle
for ascendency. Man as the stronger of the two, in representative
selfish determination, and the moral force of muscular strength, is as
full of devices for the beguilement of woman from her sacred trust as
the variations of his ability admit.”

_Padre._ “Yes, all that may be true; but you don’t talk at all like
yourself, and I can’t see what you have said has to do with revealed
religion.”

_Dr. B._ “Why, its connection is self suggestive; virtue and vice in
sexual array, for the supremacy of example, naturally oppose to each
other their attractions and temptations. Fortunately, the harmonizing
beauty of woman, with loving affection, impressed on the rude
selfishness of man the preferred happiness of a home subject to graceful
refinements, and with her sex in the majority held his passions and
appetites of instinct in abeyance. To overcome this tacit rule man
devised a series of temptations to hold her in subjugation to his
control. These were addressed to her vanity and envy, incited by the
jealous instigations of man’s preferment on the score of beauty. This
led to artificial adornment, which placed the means of temptation in the
hands of man. Then, as a plea for the encouragement of virtue, religious
revelations were instituted under the conjurations of mystery to
control, with fear, superstitious simplicity.”

_Padre._ “Perhaps I don’t quite understand you, for I can scarcely
account for my own thoughts as they seem to be so mixed with new
impressions; but if I understand what you express in words, I will
answer for myself that the revealed way of salvation is to use all the
blessings of life with moderation.”

_Mr. Welson._ (Amused.) “With the doctor’s permission, you will perhaps
appreciate an illustration that occurs to me? Woman’s naturally
unselfish affection, unbiased by the temptations of vanity and envious
curiosity, exerts with gentle forbearance a restraint upon the more
brutal appetites of man, softening asperities provoked by over
indulgence. Theodosius, the emperor champion of Christianity, opened a
way for the incursions of northern barbarians by patronizing the
intolerant sway it usurped over the more primitive and lenient rites of
paganism, as it weakened, by the introduction of effeminate luxuries
which allied the sexes for degeneration.”

_Padre._ “I have never been much of a book-worm, but it appears to me if
man, as Dr. Baāhar says, represents vice and woman virtue, your college
learning directly tends to the cultivation of a vicious course by
keeping before the people the barbarous acts of the ancients derived
from their own language, which gives the scholar a directing power, from
a studied understanding of the corruptions practiced in past ages. So
you see, it’s far better for woman, and the world at large, that she’s
denied the means of classical study; for from your own admissions, her
curiosity and envious vanity rages so greatly at the present day she’d
be more likely to play the part of a Cleopatra than a Zenobia. As the
world runs, I think the less we know of the past the better it will be
for our salvation.”

_Mr. W._ “But you forget church history, padre, from the record of which
you derive your knowledge of the fathers?”

_Padre._ “Well, but that is different from profane, for it teaches us
the way of salvation by saving grace.”

_Mr. W._ “Yes, through the tender mercies of the Inquisition.”

_Mr. Dow._ “As a listener I must acknowledge that you have each with
good arguments strangely confounded your former selves.”

The above colloquial rejoinders will serve as an illustration of the
attraction that beguiled the padre’s attention until the second day
after he had passed his port of destination. Then inquiring of the
captain the distance that still “intervened,” the supposed number of
miles being given, he relapsed into his usual routine without suspecting
that it was calculated from the stern instead of the bow. When informed
at the port of Rosas that the town of “Three Rivers” had been passed
some days previous, he exclaimed, “My goodness gracious, there was where
I wished to stop; my conscience’ sake alive, what shall I do?” The
captain, to whom he appealed, answered by asking, “What did you intend
to do at Entre Rios, padre?”

_Padre._ “A brokerage business of some sort, real estate or sugar,
whichever offered the best opening.”

_Captain._ “But, padre, you cannot speak the language, which would
render your expectations abortive, for a bargain is never closed in
these countries without a great deal of word chaffering. A clear
understanding of the language is absolutely necessary, for the
inhabitants of the river towns are very apt to “fly” from a bad bargain
when they find themselves caught and lightly held, so that the only safe
way to secure them is to clip their wings and hood-wink them in black
and white. But I can send you back without cost when we meet the next
downward bound steamer; then you will have the advice and assistance of
Mr. Welson, who perfectly understands the habits and customs of the
people.”

_Padre._ “Well, I declare to gracious, I hardly know what to do?”

_Captain._ “Would you like employment on board? I think that there is a
berth that would suit you! Besides it will afford you an opportunity to
convince Dr. Baāhar of his errors; at the same time you can perfect
yourself in speaking Spanish.”

Notwithstanding the captain’s quizzical looks and speech the padre
thankfully accepted the proffered position of second officer, with the
expressed hope that he might perform its duties in an acceptable manner.
Captain Greenwood, although somewhat crispy in speech and austere in
address, had a strong undertow of humorous appreciation when the shafts
of irony were not directed against himself. His disinterested
disposition, prompted by the padre’s kindly _vis inertiæ_, had suggested
the offer; nevertheless he really desired a person capable of
superintending small matters that would relieve him from a
responsibility not greatly to his relish. The duties imposed by the
captain were as follows: “You must be the first up in the morning and
the last in bed at night. While on duty, see that everything in the way
of labor is well done, and never interfere with advice when a helping
hand is required. Lastly, never report to me necessary changes until
after they have been made.”

_Padre._ “But, captain, if I am never to speak how am I to improve or
correct to suit you?”

_Captain._ “With the moral influence of your head and hands, when you
see anything necessary to be done!”

This settled the question of the padre’s new vocation, and he was
forthwith introduced to the crew, who greeted his installation with
marked approbation. At night, when he became genial in confessional
overflow and dogmatic in argument, he was the source of humorous
repartee and good-will among the passengers on the quarter-deck. His
American birth having toned down the quarrelsome disposition legitimate
as an inheritance to the native-born Irishman, when under the influence
of whiskey, he indulged in quaint disputations, peculiar to his Yankee
ingraft, in freedom from ill humor.

With this insight descriptive of mood foreign to the members of the
corps, we will now resume our narration of events transpiring in the
daily progress of the steamer’s river voyage.

_May 28._—The banks of the river are now clearly defined, but the water
still submerges the undergrowth that margins its lower stages in the
season of drought; the more matured growths are already peopled with the
smaller species of birds delighting in the bushy retreats overhanging
the waters. Our naturalists’ eyes are now greedily engaged in busy
search for new specimens of the feathered species.

_May 29._—This morning we reached a sand-spit formed by a confluent
stream, upon which the receding waters had left a wood-drift well suited
for the steamer’s use, having been forced by the jam of flood-tide high
out of the current. The eddies and backwater of the Pilcomayo’s stronger
flow had carried the raft and lodged it high up above the mouth of the
lesser stream, leaving an extension inter-stayed by the roots that
reached into deep water; alongside of the raft, in the smaller stream,
the steamer moored. The axes of the firemen and sailors were soon busy,
wakening for the first time the forest echoes to the chucking sound of
their strokes. The more active members of the corps volunteered their
services in aid for speedy replenishment, deriving in recompense the
invigorating novelty of exercise. While actively engaged with ready
hands and merry voices they were suddenly startled with the scream of
the steamer’s whistle, simultaneously accompanied with a flight of
arrows from the ambush of the forest screen above the raft. Fortunately
distance and trepidation from the unearthly screech of the whistle
rendered their aim harmless; the check it afforded enabled the
woodcutters to scramble up the sides of the steamer before the savages
recovered from their surprise. When they realized that the shriek was
harmless in effect, the Indians rushed forth from their concealment to
secure the axes which had been abandoned by the men in their sudden
fright, but were again momentarily intimidated by the rumbling sound of
the gong, which Antonio, the steward, had seized to increase with
concerted din the scream of the whistle. The savages’ hesitation was but
momentary, seeing that like the former the steward’s overture was
harmless in effect, then with a counter whoop of defiance they sprang
forward to secure the coveted prizes. But the second diversion brought
with it presence of mind and time for the use of more effective weapons
than empty sound. One of the two howitzers, which had been taken as
freight to Santa Anna, the commandante loaned to Captain Greenwood for
the voyage; this had been loaded as a precautionary measure the day
previous, and intrusted to the charge of Jack and Bill, two sailors who
had “shipped” on the river voyage for a “lark.” With thoughts trained to
the duty of their charge they were the first that reached the steamer’s
deck, and before the savages recovered from their second hesitation
sighted the gun and answered their whoop with a discharge of grape, with
an effect that left five of their number stretched on the logs, killed
outright, the others in quick retreat leaving a trail of blood showing
from its copious flow the infliction of dangerous wounds. The retreating
savages in their turn dropped clubs, spears, blow-pipes, and arrows, so
that there was but little danger of their return. But the premonition
caused the captain to place a guard in a position to command the
isthmus, accompanied by two hounds belonging to Mr. Dow. The dogs
following the bloody trail soon gave intimation that they had discovered
the wounded savages. Proceeding cautiously into the thicket beyond the
abattis they found near together, an elderly savage and a boy of
seventeen or eighteen years, both severely wounded. The padre, with
heedless but kindly intention, attempted to raise the head of the old
Indian upon his arm to relieve his uncomfortable position, while the
others stanched his wounds. In a second from the time the padre’s arm
came within reach of the savage, his teeth were fastened upon the arm
above the elbow, while with working tenacity he used his utmost energy
to penetrate the sleeve of his coat. His intention was evident from the
greenish slaver that oozed from the corners of his mouth, betraying in
appearance the characteristics of the dreaded poison. Bill, who was near
at hand, relieved the padre from the danger of poisonous inoculation,
before the teeth of the savage had penetrated the cloth, by the
introduction of a marlin-spike with a decisive force that showed but
little care for their preservation. The boy was more tractable,
permitting his captors to handle him as they pleased. Two other savages
were overtaken dragging themselves from bush to bush. When surrounded
they were still defiant, threatening all who approached with spear-heads
attached to short staffs; these were finally struck out of their hands,
but they still repelled peaceful overtures, making a formidable show of
resistance with teeth and nails. We had been specially warned against
coming into close quarters with them by an old trader, who had
frequently encountered their ferocious tendencies in his travels.
Finding all our conciliatory attempts futile the wounded savages were
left to their fate. Adopting the padre’s suggestion, the young Indian
and his savage companion were taken on board, with the intention of
trying the effect of kind treatment, but a lasso in the practiced hands
of a guacho was required to persuade the latter to accept the proffered
hospitality of the boat. Aside from the comparative docility of the boy,
his lack of resemblance in feature and general conformation plainly
declared that his subserviency to the will of his companion did not
arise from parental affection. Shackling them to the windlass they were
placed under the guardianship of the dogs, whose favorite lounge was on
either side of the bowsprit heel beneath the shadow of the chocks. After
they were secured, all hands, with the exception of the engineer,
steward, and cooks, resumed their labors on the raft. As the padre
insisted that it was a barbarous shame to throw the bodies of the dead
savages into the water to become the food of alligators, when a few
minutes’ labor would make them a decent grave in the sand, he was
allowed the privilege of extending to the defuncts the rites of burial.
As the spade in his hands had not been a favorite specialty during the
more elastic periods of his existence under the benign influence of
temperate heat, the torrid glow of the morning acting in concert with a
stimulant he had taken to steady his nerves, caused a sweltering
perspiration that in no way accelerated the progress of his pious
undertaking. The sands having become quick from recent saturation were
constantly caving, so that in addition to aggravation he was in danger
of becoming a victim to his sextonic benevolence. While trying to
extricate himself from the caving sand, the while vainly pleading for
assistance from the laughing spectators of his disaster, his attention
became fixed upon an array of yellow nuggets which he had overlooked
when thrown from their bed with the sand. His silence and curious
investigation with hands and eyes extorted the inquiry, “What is it,
padre?” The laconic answer, “Gold!” brought the whole party to his
rescue, including the sentinels from the logs above, while the engineer,
steward, and cook deserted their posts in greedy haste. When the truth
of his announcement was verified they with some difficulty dragged him
from his grave, then oblivious to thoughts of savage surprise and
poisoned arrows, they consigned the dead to the river, without
remonstrance from the padre, and with flushed avidity commenced with
spade and pan to unearth the precious metal. Mid-day, with its heat,
found them still engaged, heedless of danger from the sun’s rays and the
miasmic current converging upon the spit from the confluent streams.
Silence alternating with wild bursts of hilarity, caused the captive
savages, chained to the steamer’s windlass, to gaze with wondering looks
of amazement.

Through the day, until darkness precluded the possibility of detecting
the golden grains, the wild search continued, then when collected on the
steamer’s deck they bethought themselves of the dangers to which they
had been exposed. Although resolved to be more cautious in future while
gathering their golden trove, its tangible presence banished fear; still
as a thoughtful precaution the steamer was dropped into the stream as a
guard against surprise.




                              CHAPTER II.


At early dawn on the 29th all were on the alert, anxious to recommence
their gold-gathering labor, but obedient to the captain’s request the
steamer was first supplied with its full allotment of wood. This was
accomplished with a despatch that betokened an earnest desire to resume
their yesterday’s toil in the sands. The captain and padre explained the
most approved methods for the economical saving of the smaller
particles, which brought into requisition the steward’s and cook’s
wares. The tableau of the second day, although lacking in the wilder
excitement of the previous, incident to the impressions of first
discovery, would have afforded a novelty unparalleled in scenic variety
for the study of an artist, but unfortunately our own was too much
engrossed with interest to heed the rare advantages of the absurd
comicalities of selfishness. In truth all were so moved by an
acquisitive spirit, but little thought was given to the ludicrous
groupings of the parties engaged, or the solitary wildness of the
surrounding scenery, contrasting so vividly with the pretentious
civilization of the laborers.

On the morning of June 3, the spit was left in the wake of the steamer,
exhausted of its free surface gold, and much to the surprise of all
there was a general expression of relief when it was lost to view, and
the discomfort it had caused began to disappear with the revival of
order. But a still greater surprise was in store, which removed all the
barriers of distinction bred by the pride of birth and station from the
standard of laboring vocation, inasmuch as they debarred in exchange
kindly equality in reciprocation. Unusual alacrity and kindliness of
feeling had been observed in “putting” the vessel to rights by the
hands, which was explained, when accomplished, by Jack and Bill, who
came aft with hats in hand. After bowing all round, Bill the prompter
nudged Jack the spokesman to give way, which he essayed to do, but from
confusion was unable to get a running bight of phrase, until aided by
the captain’s inquiry, “Well, what is it, my man?”

_Jack._ “You see, Bill and I started up the river to freshen our joints,
which had grown stiff and creaky with salt junk and hard tack. Well,
after we had loosened our barnacles with the treacle of a Spanish
skipper we took French leave and laid low until you hove in sight. Now
you see after we entered with you it took us some time to get the run of
the fair weather you made for all hands. Expecting to be taken aback
with a sharp squall we kept our eyes well to the wind’ard, for you see
on this river with cannibals on the lookout and no vessels there was no
chance of skulking on shore for a down-river craft. To be sure, we soon
found that we were out and wide in our calculations, so when brought to
our bearings we began to take kindly to the lay of our watches in
scrubbing and wooding, as there was no hand-spike snubbing or squeak of
hard words. Then comes this gold lay, and when you says, ‘Boys, here’s
your chance, pitch in, every man for himself without envy,’ we were
taken aback with a fair wind. When we came on board to empty our hats we
began to take our bearings, and says Bill to me, after an observation,
‘We’ve shipped and signed the papers, and this gold is way freight, so
you see it’s not right to tap the cargo on full rations.’

“There was the p’int clear, and we said ‘Never a bit!’ So you see after
the flurry was over we put the question to the others and they took the
bearings at once; so you see that we’ve concluded that we’re only
‘titled to prize money at most, just as you valer the danger we run with
the savages.”

This construction, regulated by the sea usage of man-of-war’s men, who
had grown gray and poverty stricken in “service,” was so generous in the
sincerity of honest proposition for revoking the captain’s liberality
that he asked time for consideration. In submission the procession,
headed by the two honest tars, retreated to the “for’ard” hatch, on
which they placed their well-filled hats to await the captain’s
decision. A consultation with the members of the corps was immediately
held to decide upon a method to insure an equitable division of the gold
suited to the emergency. After a variety of propositions had been made
and rejected, the padre advanced one that proved the most acceptable.
His suggestion was that the passengers and officers should abide
contented with their own gatherings, as they were proportionately less
than those of the crew; but that an equal division of theirs should be
made to avoid envy. When this equitable measure was made known to the
men, Jack, with the advice of Bill, objected that the most important
persons had been left out, which in their opinion were the vessel and
captain. As this amended consideration met with general approval, it was
adopted. Then Antonio, the steward, said, that the men for’ard, from
being accustomed to work, had gathered so much more in proportion than
those aft, he would propose to “lump” the whole for an equal division,
after one fifth had been deducted for the vessel’s and captain’s share.
This was acted upon, notwithstanding the captain’s protest that all
should share alike. The division accomplished, there was a hearty
shaking of hands that opened a sympathetic current of reciprocation void
of selfish envy, which as an omen heralded a happy result for their
adventurous voyage. After the parties to this happy arbitration had
resumed their usual avocations, Jack and Bill—to whom had been assigned
the duty of “freshening up” the trimmings of capstan, binnacle, and
other extras aft, usually attended to in their watch below, to save
time—entered upon their duty during the siesta hour of the day. While
engaged they ruminated in silence until the deck was cleared of chance
listeners, then the rapid change of tobacco quids from side to side of
their mouths, and an unusual flow of the green ooze from the corners
gave indication of thought’s supremacy. At length when they “supposed”
the coast was clear, Jack gave an expressive tug at his waistband, then
after blowing his nose with a clarion note, he sputtered, “Blast my
buttons, Bill, if this fresh-water turtle of a captain hain’t sounded
and found a salt-water leak in the water run of my eyes!” Bill without
answering, except with a suppressed sniffle, found it necessary to
expectorate and blow his nose over the bulwark nettings. A prolonged
effort having relieved his emotions he shuffled back, and shyly
exclaimed, with a whispering sob, “Don’t, Jack.”

Woman’s distress, from the period of youth and beauty, through all the
gradation of cause, to its decline with the influence of age and
ugliness, when haggish distemper engendered from selfish disappointment
makes it repulsively loathsome, I have felt with impulsive variations,
but never experienced the like choking sensations of affectionate
sympathy, from the evidences of gratitude, that held me bound during the
enactment of this short scene, so truthful in expression. Probably
during their long term of service they had never felt a like cause,
foreign to themselves, for the revival of emotions so nearly allied to
affectionate reciprocation; for it was evident that the gold of itself
occupied a minor impression in the ruling of their thoughts. Indeed, in
the after detached rehearsal of their sea-faring experience, they
declared that a glass of grog was the only compensation they had ever
known a sea captain to bestow upon his sailors for extra labor. The
representatives of tropical countries, of which a majority of the crew
was composed, were more open and volatile in their expressions of
gratitude; but like the English sailors attested that the self-denial of
Captain Greenwood was the only exception in their experience in which
the master of a vessel had failed to exact to the uttermost the fruits
of their labor.

From the Tortugian era of the third of June Captain Greenwood became a
deity of adoration to his crew, who offered daily sacrifice of labor for
kindly propitiation, which from promptness in anticipation rendered the
padre’s official vocation a sinecure.

The sun of June 4 found the _Tortuga’s_ decks neatly scrubbed and washed
in readiness for its rays; the two savages having participated in the
cleanly overture, the elder receiving his somewhat copious douche with a
grateful show of teeth; but the younger’s eyes were used with such an
evident desire for pitying sympathy that Antonio volunteered his
tonsorial service as an initiatory introduction to civilized habits.
This act won the young savage’s first love; while it added another count
to the special hatreds of the old, who bestowed upon Antonio a toothful
longing to recompense his civilized barbarity. The improvement of the
young savage was so marked from the use of soap, sand, and scissors,
with the grateful expression produced, that Antonio was fain to crown
his morning’s missionary labor, and his neophyte’s satisfaction, with a
hat.




                              CHAPTER III.


While the events related in the preceding chapter were in progress,
which gave advent to the new era, the manacled savages would have fared
poorly but for the ever mindful benevolence of Padre Simon, who
ministered to their relief after depositing with his traps his godsend,
which he averred came from the source of their misfortunes. His arm
warned him to be cautious in his approach to the old savage, but he
could not refrain from the pitying exclamation “It’s a shame,” when he
saw him bound to the links of the cable with its coils for his bed.
Placing the food he had brought cautiously within reach, he left with
intention of pleading for some aid in mitigation of their painful
position, but the question of an equitable division of the gold trove
diverted his thoughts. But after the ablutions of the succeeding
morning, and Antonio’s improvement of the younger savage, his
dereliction occurred to his thoughts under the stimulating inspiration
of a somewhat copious oblation to memory, which served to render the
sincerity of his repentant remorse heedless. Under the sacrificial
impression he hastened forward to make amends for his forgetful
inhumanity. Without observing the change already made for the ease of
the savage, he attempted to place an oakum fender between his back and
the cable. Exposing his arm the brute again seized it with a vicious
energy that bespoke his determination of obtaining recompense for his
morning’s aggravations. With the pain, caused by the working teeth of
the savage, the padre’s terror of the deadly poison was revived, which
caused him to cry for help in frenzied accents, alarming all on board.
Again English Jack was the first to reach the struggling victim of
misplaced pity. With a sailor’s promptness he forced his sheath knife
between the back teeth of the cannibal with a delicacy peculiar to the
tar when called upon to repel boarders; working the blade, with a prying
motion, hither and thither with the edge directed toward the ear the
backward capacity of the mouth was insensibly enlarged, which produced a
diminution of muscular tenacity and consequent release of the padre’s
arm. His release was not effected until the teeth of the savage had
penetrated through his linen coat and sleeve of his shirt, inflicting
bruised punctures beneath the skin sufficient for the absorption of
virus. The general consternation was greatly increased by the exultant
gleams darted from the eyes of the bleeding savage. Dr. Baāhar had just
prescribed whiskey to be taken in copious draughts for _ad deliquium_
effect, which the padre, with a sense of relief, said he had premised,
when the young savage attracted attention by pantomimic gesticulation,
at the same time producing from his mouth a small sac of an acorn’s size
and shape. From the pleased honesty of his expression and the scowls of
the old savage, it was apparent that it contained an antidote for the
poison. Aabrawa having caught some familiar words, he was soon able to
add his assurance in verification of the boy’s ability to counteract the
effects of the poison with a sure antidote. The padre with fear
hesitatingly submitted his arm to the boy’s mouth, the old savage
regarding the operation with looks that boded ill to the savior and
saved if by accident they should come within his reach for injury. The
padre, when impressed with the kindly intention of the boy,
apostrophized the old wretch in this wise: “You ungrateful venomous old
serpent, upon my conscience you ought to be made to crawl on your belly
all the days of your life with a rattle tied to your—well if you haven’t
a tail, you are a vile reptile all the same, and I don’t believe all the
purgatories in creation can change you! Upon my soul, it’s a shame and
an imposition for you to pretend to be a man with a soul to be saved!”
Here the padre observing the smiles provoked by the earnestness of his
address to an object as incapable of appreciating as he was of
understanding the language in which the anathematizing sentence was
couched, apologetically appealed to his auditors, “You know that what I
have said is as true as there is a day of salvation for man to sin
away.”

“Are you not assuming,” asked Mr. Welson, “the privilege and
understanding of a judge without knowledge sufficient for the
condemnatory sentence you have pronounced as a penalty against this
savage?”

“By their works ye shall know them,” replied the padre, looking wofully
at his arm.

This retort placed the padre’s star in the ascendant, and it was
immediately proposed that the mouth of the old savage should be rid of
its poison, a task which Jack and Bill volunteered to accomplish.
Preparing a running noose they slipped it over his arms, pinioning them
to his side, and then proceeded with sheath knife and marline-spike to
open his mouth for investigation, but not without strenuous efforts on
the part of the subject for revengeful retaliation. Beneath his tongue
they found two sacs, or bladders of the river whiting, attached to the
cuspid teeth, which by the tongue’s pressure could be made to eject
their contents into wounds inflicted with the sharpened teeth, which
were pointed like fangs, verifying the padre’s estimate of his reptile
instincts. Above, attached to teeth upon either side, were the sacs
containing the antidote in position to be pressed by the cheeks. Rid of
these venomous appliances the nozzle of the steamer’s hose played the
part of a purifier by injecting a bountiful supply of water into his
mouth, regardless of the published restrictions of the humane Society
for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals.

                  *       *       *       *       *

During the passage of the two days succeeding that of the padre’s
mishap, parties of savages were discovered tracking the progress of the
steamer, the while with opportunity holding communication by signs with
the captive chief. As he did not appear to be in the slightest degree
amenable to kind treatment, and his presence on board was neither safe,
agreeable, or ornamental, a consultation was held for the best means to
be used for his disposal. As no feasible method appeared for his
immediate transfer to the shore with beneficial effect upon his kindred,
Mr. Welson asked the privilege of retaining him on board as a subject
for instinctive experiment. The savage chief having, in the thoughtless
zeal of the two sailors,—bred from automatic education on board of a
“man of war,”—received gratuitous injury, they lost caste in the
captain’s favor, which caused them to “overhaul” their thoughts for a
restorative. Bill sagely remarked that “What’s done’s done, but now we
see the drift to smooth water we must kedge for the current and a fair
wind; so we must try to make the old shark as comfortable as we can.”
This opinion meeting with the hearty approval of his mate, they at once
“set about” rectifying the effects of their brutality, without fully
realizing in thought the extent of their own culpability. Still there
was a vague remonstrance that “loomed up” from youthful impression which
admonished them of the source of the captain’s silent reproof. While
engaged in their propitiatory labors the Indian boy, or “cub” as they
styled him, watched, and apparently detected the source of the kindly
influence wrought in the mood of the sailors. His looks of grateful
appreciation attracted the sailors’ attention, which caused Jack to
exclaim, “I say Bill, the young un’s throwing out signals of distress;
odds, we were too hard on the old brute. P’raps we can take the young un
in tow; suppose we give him an outfit, he seems to take kindly to his
head-gear.”

Bill bestowed an “observation” on the boy, and became convinced that no
treachery was meditated, but that all was fair and above board, so they
resolved to rig him out ship-shape in their watch below. Their intention
being discovered while in progress, there was a general overhauling of
kits, so that the originators were obliged to accept contributions in
excess of their requirements. Aabrawa, while the metamorphosis was in
progress, discovered that he was an adopted prisoner of the old savage,
and that his name with his own tribe was Waantha. To all the trial
changes in the process of clothing him, Waantha submitted with
unmistakable evidences of gratification; and when fully dressed to the
satisfaction of his impromptu guardians he was escorted by Antonio and
the sailors aft for the captain’s inspection and approval. The pleasing
expression of his joyfully bewildered face won the kindly confidence of
all, and he was voted his liberty. When asked by the captain if he would
like to be employed, he expressed his desire to help Antonio, who with
permission cordially adopted him as an apprentice in the culinary
department. When duly installed, as a dish-washer, the concentrated ire
of the old chief was fully aroused, causing his eyes to fairly
scintillate with fury as he readily understood that his plans would be
exposed. The sailors’ thoughtful endeavors to win back the captain’s
favor gradually proved successful, and when fully reinstated showed a
careful regard for its retention.

Mr. Dow in his naturalistic wanderings had acquired a keenness of
perception for the detection of danger from premonitory indications that
exceeded, from his natural endowments, the sagacity of the veteran
trappers of the North American wilds, so that with Aabrawa and his two
well trained dogs he had felt himself proof from surprisal. In proof of
his cultivated superiority he instructed the members of the corps in the
various causes inciting the flight of birds along the banks of the river
and over the distant forests, which invariably proved to be correct in
inception. The flight of water-fowl disturbed by alligators or other
causes, birds by serpents or monkeys, or like inimical foes, he could
detect the intruding species with unerring certainty while distant to
the utmost reach of the eye. Early in the afternoon a flight of parrots
rose over a distant headland, settling again in the same place; this was
repeated frequently with upward impetuosity, which with irregularity in
rise and descent indicated some vengeful cause. In explanation, Mr. Dow
said, “You will find on rounding the headland a settlement of Brazilian
apes, of a different species from any you have yet seen, also in the
neighborhood a plantation of sugar bananas. These the natives believe
the apes plant, as the spot selected is always adapted in a special way
to their growth, and in close proximity to a grove of trees suited in
spread of limbs for their arboreal habitations. The parrots have
likewise a great fondness for the luscious fruit, which is known as the
ape banana, and gather in flocks for poaching depredations, in which
large numbers lose their lives, for they are no match in quickness of
flight for the nimble quadrumanal defenders of the rights of freehold
proprietorship, who have acquired considerable skill in the use of
projectile weapons. When we reach the plantation you will find them
engaged in defending ‘the fruits of their labor,’ unless the unusual
appearance of the steamer alarms both parties.”

Doubling the headland a well protected cove opened to view with a
crescent shaped hill sloping to the southwest, enclosing in its semi-
amphitheatre a tamarisk grove with a banana patch upon the rise of the
hillside. As the parrots had taken flight on the approach of the boat,
and there were no signs of Indians or apes, the members of the corps
proposed an exploring party for the verification of Mr. Dow’s
descriptive sagacity. Mr. Dow excused himself from joining the exploring
party, on the plea that he had once visited a settlement on one of the
tributaries of the Amazon, of which he still retained a vivid
impression, that was too recent to require revival. His ambiguity in
describing the peculiarities of their domestic economy and defensive
resources we had occasion to recollect. After precautionary measures had
been taken to avoid surprise from the tracking savages, we landed,
directing our steps in the first instance to the banana plantation. Its
appearance well sustained the popular traditions of the Indians, as the
plants were separated by well defined paths, and around their stalks not
a weed or spear of grass was to be detected. This at least denoted care
in grubbing, which of itself is an initiatory indication of cultivation.
The plat was continued within the slope of the hillock; at one time the
bluff bank of an inlet from the river which had been filled up by the
drift debris and alluvial deposit caught in its curve, intermixed with
the wash from the highlands. After completing our survey of the banana
garden, and in our progress selecting and cutting unbidden the ripest
bunches of the golden fruit, which were sent on board, we descended into
the basin of the tamarisk grove to inspect the community habitations of
the apes. Supposing, from the universal silence, that the inhabitants
had fled in alarm on the steamer’s approach, we were admiring the high
order of architecture displayed in the arrangement of their habitations,
at the same time questioning with wonder their unnatural desertion
despite the prevailing curiosity of the species in the presence of
mankind, when a guttural challenge was reëchoed from hundreds of mouths
in answer to our query. In a moment the branches above were alive with
the hosts we had excluded from our reckoning, who in chattering response
tendered us the hospitalities of their aerial city in a shower of
cocoanuts, stones, clubs, and other missiles rank with the “reverence”
of ordure, prostrating three of our number outright, while they bewrayed
all with an unendurable odor, that would have rendered the stink-pots of
ancient Greece worthy of being esteemed pouncet-boxes for relief. These
tokens of high admiration, designed for the distinguished reception of
allied humanity, were accompanied with a jabbering outburst which could
only be likened to an explosion of Chinese tongues. To save ourselves
was impossible, for in a moment after they had discharged their weapons,
pendant from every branch above was an ape ready to fall upon us. At
this threatened juncture, when our lives depended upon the drop, the
screech of the steam-whistle saved us. Some of our late assailants,
paralyzed with the fearful shriek, dropped nerveless to the ground;
others upon us, and clinging to our persons grinned beseechingly for
protection. But the majority swung themselves from limb to limb in wild
panic, disappearing over the brow of the hill. Without waiting to test
the permanency of their fears, or courage for a rally, we shook off our
personal attachments, and assisted the wounded on board, under cover of
the still sounding whistle. In candor I must confess that our reception
by those who remained on board ill accorded, from a lack of pitying
sympathy, with our narrow escape from imminent peril. Yet I will as
frankly acknowledge that there was ample cause for the levity of their
manifest disgust at our approach; but when the old savage added his grin
to the measure of our disgrace it was more than human nature could bear,
and we thankfully accepted a warm bath, in our clothes, proffered by the
engineer, while standing on the outjutting portion of the gangway plank,
which he administered through the nozzle of the deck hose. Even Jack,
who had received an ugly gash which had sounded the depth of his scalp,
was obliged to submit to purification before Doctor Baāhar would bestow
upon him the rites of absolution conferred by adhesive plaster,
notwithstanding his plight was equally abnormal. But the sailor, in the
spirit of his invincible good humor, provoked by the novelty of the
encounter, declared that he knew the fellow who had barked his head-
piece, and would have his revenge. Although we failed to appreciate the
mirth of our scathless “friends,” we were exceedingly thankful for our
escape, for we realized in the cool moments of reflection the peril we
had encountered too vividly for the capital of a laugh at our own
expense. Neither did we wish for a second trial of Mr. Dow’s skill in
aping practical jokes. Bill, in expressing his gratitude for his
friend’s escape, said, “There you lay, Jack, knocked on the head, and
them fellows just ready to drop on us tooth and nail; well, I can tell
you our lives weren’t worth the flutter of a gaff to’sel in a gale of
wind, when the whistle brought them up with a sharp turn. But what’s
food for one’s fun for another; the squall just took the wild ones aback
like the wink of a gib in a luff, so they turned tail and scuttled away,
and we hauled off for repairs, mighty glad they didn’t grapple.”

While the explorers’ ablutions were in progress ape sentinels were seen
in the tree tops above their habitations, in which position they
continued until a curve of the river concealed them from view.

_June 8._—Large parties of Indians have been seen inland on both banks
of the river during the day. The swiftness of the river’s current has
greatly increased, giving indication of an upward incline to a more
elevated plateau. Open glades reaching to the river are now of frequent
occurrence. The left or eastern bank is less defined than the western,
and bears stronger evidences of alluvial deposits in its arboreal
growths.

                  *       *       *       *       *

_June 10._—Our redeemed captive boy begins to show many pleasing traits,
among which grateful fidelity is not the least. His attachment to
Antonio, who first bestowed upon him pitying kindness, is prominently
manifest and touching in the simplicity of its promptings. He desired
Aabrawa to ask the captain to allow him to remain on board, promising
that he would try and speak and make himself useful when recovered from
his wound. The captain received his professions of attachment with a
warmth that made his eyes glisten with joy. Mr. Welson suggested that it
would be necessary to christen him, proposing that Padre Simon should
officiate in administering baptismal rites. But the padre objected that
he was not in orders, and for a layman to assume the solemn
responsibility of baptizing was in his opinion but a grade less than
presumptuous blasphemy. M. Hollydorf referred him to the example of John
the Baptist when in a similar position, exhorting him to do his duty
fearlessly, as the act of consummating the conversion of a heathen would
be esteemed a meritorious service by the most bigoted of the sects. The
padre still urged, “He does not understand our language, and
consequently the effect of redeeming grace necessary for the
consecrational rites of Christian adoption fulfilled by baptism.” Mr.
Welson said, he need have no scruples on that score, for Xavier, Ricci,
and other missionary apostles of the Church boast, each, of the baptism
of five thousand and more heathen Chinese in less than a month after
their arrival in the country, and without being able to communicate with
their catechumens by the aid of interpretation. Having a strong
reverence for the opinion of Mr. Welson, he reluctantly consented to
officiate. Antonio standing as godfather, he was christened “Tortuga
Waantha.” Scenes of this description were a source of renewed vitality
to Mr. Welson, as it afforded him special delight to expose the vagaries
of the three professions founded upon theoretical science. In fact, the
very chairs of his Panamanian office were made available for startling
effects in support of his specialities; indeed, his reputation had
obtained such distant recognition, that strangers en route preferred to
stand isolated in his presence. From these experimental essays none of
his friends escaped; sensitiveness, dignity, and reserve, were in fact
special invitations for the exercise of his curative skill, if in the
slightest degree morbid in tendency. After meridian, when his books had
been laid aside for the day, it had been his custom to indulge his
quizzical humor in trolling for fun, and it was a rare occasion that did
not offer a European or American gudgeon, isthmus bound, ready to take
his bait.

As before mentioned, it had been his intention to return from his river
voyage by a Brazilian steamer, but the varied characteristics of the
members of the scientific corps, with the chance additions, made him
resolve to forego the obligations of his business relations for the
indulgence offered to his humorous inclinations. Meeting unexpectedly
with his old friend Dow at Santa Anna, he eagerly seconded the exploring
adventure of the Pilcomayo, from the prospective novelty it offered for
the cultivation of his humorous studies. In addition to the incompatible
whimsies of scientific association, the questionable reports of an
undiscovered inland city provoked a second incentive. With this more
explicit introduction of Mr. Welson, who from accident and inclination
became one of the most important aids in directing and harmonizing the
attainable objects of the expedition, we will resume the thread of our
narrative.




                              CHAPTER IV.


Notwithstanding the confirmed assurance of the sufficient efficacy of
the antidote applied by Waantha for counteracting the poisonous
inoculation of the padre’s arm, he still continued the use of whiskey
with the thoughtless lack of consideration that fosters habits of
indulgence and self-imposed penalties. In verification of the advanced
statement, that artificial stimulation gave birth to war and the three
curative professions, the padre, in common with his paternal ancestors,
became polemically disposed when subject to the influence of his imposed
habits. Waantha’s happy manifestations of “regeneration” caused him to
urge dogmatically, “You must acknowledge, Mr. Welson, that the Jesuit
fathers have done much good, for of all nations and sects they alone
have succeeded in bringing tribes of Indians under the influence of
civilized control.”

“Yes,” replied Mr. Welson, but with the reprobating clause, that “they
have manifested in all their missionary labors a paramount zeal for the
selfish aggrandizement of their partisan order in the extension of its
power for enforcing the control of a hypocritical despotism; the real
welfare of the heathen converts being held as a blind of nominal
consideration. Indeed, the Jesuitical method enacts the part of whiskey
in its habitual rule over the faculties of civilized society; in
conjuring for the subjugation of reason superstition for the supremacy
of fanatical instinct.”

The padre startled, exclaimed, “Upon my conscience, Mr. Welson, I am
afraid you are little better than an infidel!”

Mr. Welson left the padre with an ill-concealed show of disdain. Finding
M. Hollydorf engaged, with the assistance of Mr. Dow, in removing a
powerful electro-magnetic battery—one of Shockwit’s best—from its case,
it occurred to him that amusement, if not more permanent advantage,
might be derived in trying its effect upon the savage chief. This
proposition was readily adopted, with the resolve that only those
necessary for the working accomplishment of their purpose should
understand the nature of their occupations. The experiment, under the
experienced management of Mr. Welson, promised some rare developments of
motor effects, in the production of instinctive superstition, without
committing an act of cruelty beyond the wholesome excitement of animal
fear. As it was necessary to keep the instrument out of sight to secure
the full impression of supernatural effect, the captain offered his
stateroom as the best adapted for the preservation of secrecy and the
effectual working of the instrument. With the aid of the two sailors,
the wires were passed out of the port and run unobserved outside of the
bulwarks, and so arranged that the old savage could not escape the full
force of the electrical shock. When completed, the connection of the
circuit was tried in the absence of persons from the neighborhood of the
intended victim. The result was a prolonged yell, that not only
surprised the uninitiated on board, but brought inquiring heads forth
from ambush on shore. To the wonder and alarm of all on board excluded
from a participation in the secret, the old savage was found writhing in
an agony of fear entirely bereft of stoicism. Various explanations were
suggested to account for the startling phenomena. The padre admonished
Mr. Welson that it was, without doubt, the working of the spirit of
repentant regeneration, as the Fathers had recorded numerous instances
where the self-convicted had cried out in anguish, “What shall I do to
be saved?”—the fact being made known after they had acquired a knowledge
of missionary language. He averred that there could be but little doubt
that it was the workings of the spirit of conviction, from the agony of
his expression. Thereupon he desired Aabrawa to inquire into the cause,
as it had all of the appearance of a miraculous conversion. But the old
chief stared at Aabrawa, helplessly unable to speak through an excess of
fear. Mr. Welson then counter-admonished the padre, that as a professed
follower of the Church it was his evident duty to point out to the
convert the appointed way of salvation. As all supported this
suggestion, the padre remonstrated, while looking wofully at his arm, “I
once offered him my sympathy and aid for his relief, but he repulsed me
so brutally, upon my conscience, I am afraid to try him again.”

His attention being called to the helpless condition of his late
antagonist, he was finally persuaded to adventure one of his hands upon
the head of the savage in the way of benediction. Answering to a given
signal the battery claimed the padre as a victim through the chief,
whose yell was accompanied with the exclamation, “My conscience’ sake
alive!”—then his fears became as vivid in expression as those of his
intended convert. Mr. Welson, addressing himself somewhat scornfully to
the padre, said, “You accused me of infidelity when I endeavored to use
my privileged endowment of reason bestowed by the Creator for human
direction; now you will see how much better it serves as an exorcist
than your faith in a religion that ignores man’s duty for the
fulfillment of intention in its bestowal.” He then made a few passes
over the Indian, and when he had gained the full attraction of fearful
awe with mumbling incantations, the padre was reluctantly induced to
replace his hands on the chief’s shoulders and remove them without
alarming impression. Then assuming an awful aspect and tone, as if
addressing the powers of air with the spirit of invocation, he implored
their aid to convict the reptile savage, and civilized devotee of a
blind infatuation, of their willful errors alike dangerous to the well-
being of humanity. When made sufficiently impressive he commanded the
padre to take the chief’s hands. Overawed by the majestic impersonation
of sublime authority enacted by Mr. Welson, the two joined hands, both
keeping their eyes fastened in blank wonder upon his face and movements.
The conjuration having fixed their attention, he pronounced in a loud
voice the magic word “Letonnow!” Immediately the two commenced a series
of contortionate grimaces, directed toward each other, accompanied with
spasmodic hand-jerking. The actors were so engrossed with their fears
that the spectators were fain to have recourse to a variety of
succedaneum vents to suppress the outburst of laughter, the sailors
adopting the novel expedient of revolving their quids around the tips of
their tongues, which ejected a jet of saturated decoction from the
corners of their mouths with every revolution. But for Mr. Welson’s
practiced command of his emotions, subject to the control of judgment,
the ludicrous scene might have been continued to the extent of injury,
for his associates were, from spasmodic action, to all intents
speechless. When at length the larger fraction of a minute had been
exhausted in husky attempts to command his voice, he managed to stay
proceedings with a sign evoked from head and hand, faintly sustained
with a vocal negative. When the current was checked the last vestige of
ferocity had departed from the face of the savage, leaving the vacuum
unsupplied, as it was his sole dependence for the facial expression of
his emotions. The padre’s face was confounded with a blending of
superstitious dread and suspicion, for with all his phantasmic
nervousness provoked by the excessive remedial use of whiskey and
tobacco, he could not fail to detect the covert effort of restraint that
prevailed. Indeed, with his natural powers of perception free from their
imposed embargo, he would have detected the means employed for the
production of effects known to the most illiterate members of scientific
academies. To dissipate his suspicions the padre had recourse to Doctor
Baāhar, of whom he anxiously inquired whether Mr. Welson derived his
power from a legitimate source compatible with the apostolic faith
inculcated by the tenets of the Church. The doctor, as instinctively
absurd when out of the scholastic thrills of antiquity, found especial
gratification in teasing those subject to the common frailties of his
kind. So, taking his cue from the padre’s necromantic suggestion, he
explained that Eusebius, and other Fathers of the primitive Church
acquainted with the practice of Egyptian astrology, had confirmed the
prevalent belief that in certain families, under peculiar conditions,
there was a power developed similar to that exhibited by Mr. Welson.

Here Mr. Dow interrupted their conversation by calling the attention of
the padre to the savage, who was following Mr. Welson with the docility
of a spaniel. Observing his emotions of superstition he asked, “Are you
in reality so blind, padre, that you are unable to detect the agency of
Mr. Welson’s power over the savage? You seem to be impressed with the
belief that Mr. Welson has been enacting the part of a magician in
producing these effects upon the savage, whose ignorance sympathizes
with, or rather reciprocates your superstitious delusions? How is it
possible for you to overlook, with thought, an impression so familiar to
your understanding, and in fact, place yourself on a level with this
savage from a lack of intelligent perception? Really, padre, you
confound me with astonishment. Time, place, and circumstances, with
certain abetting aids, have thrown you off your guard.” A shake of Mr.
Welson’s head prevented Mr. Dow from revealing the means employed, as he
wished to confound the padre with further evidences of his simplicity
and heedlessness. Beckoning the sailor satellites of the savage, he was
led back to his place of confinement, and secured in contact with the
wires of the battery; then, when the padre’s attention was otherwise
engaged, a glass of whiskey from his bottle was administered by Mr.
Welson to his experimental victim. But a short time had elapsed when
attention was called to an unusual disturbance forward, in which the
fierce snarling growl of the dogs was commingled with the guttural
“ughs” of the savage, whose face was contorted with an expression of
demoniac rage, causing his mouth to froth, exposing through its slaver
his pointed teeth, while his eyes gleamed with a ferocity that prompted
the padre to flight. But when assured that he was securely confined, the
padre asked Mr. Dow what he thought of the source of Mr. Welson’s agency
now! Mr. Dow led him to the captain’s room; with a glance at the
instrument the nature of his ludicrous position began to dawn. But when
his whiskey bottle with diminished contents was produced and proclaimed
as the magician of ferocity, his face mantled with the scarlet dismay of
shame, which with his ejaculation of “My goodness gracious, what a fool
I have been!” filled the cup of mirth to overflowing.

                  *       *       *       *       *

Since the morning of the 9th the strength of the current had increased
so rapidly that the captain feared we were approaching impassable
rapids; but at nightfall we entered into a broad expanse of water
resembling a lake. Keeping beyond the range of arrows, Mr. Dow and
Welson in the punt succeeded in killing sufficient wild fowl for a
week’s supply. Shortly after nightfall the dogs with their muzzles
primed over the chocks kept up a warning cry. Waantha with a crutch, the
gift of the carpenter, hopped about the deck with eyes on the alert, and
ears primed for sounds from the water and shore. Through the night his
vigilance was sustained, until in the darkness of the morning hours he
aroused Jack’s attention to floating objects on the water just visible
to his sight, but while peering the whiz of an arrow interpreted the
source of danger. The angle of flight enabled him to judge with
tolerable correctness the position of the foe who discharged it; the
yells which answered the report of his escopeta loaded with buckshot
bespoke his success with others if not the one whose intention provoked
retaliation.

_June 11._—Jack’s morning salute awoke all on board, causing a general
muster to learn the source of provocation. While Mr. Dow was taking his
coffee in the dawning twilight, Waantha hobbled to the place where he
was sitting and after directing his attention to an approaching swan,
took one of the dead ducks hanging under the awning and placed it on his
head, at the same time imitating the movements of a man decoy.
Understanding his meaning, Mr. Dow took his rifle from the rack and sped
a bullet with sure aim; the unfortunate bird extended above the surface
a black pair of arms, then with a gurgling cry sunk out of sight. Flocks
of ducks which had been gradually nearing the steamer on all sides made
for the shore without taking wing, showing by the wake the nature of the
fowl before the submerged Indians clambered up the banks. The undaunted
perseverance of the savages in tracking the steamer, despite of our
superior weapons, showed an indomitable determination, proof to danger
and disappointment, which detracted greatly from our prospective
feelings of safety when exposed to the disadvantages of land travel.

The steam-whistle and gong had startled them at first, but they had
tested their harmless natures, and evidently thought the howitzers
relatives, whose destructiveness could be avoided as easily as the
poison of their arrows when they had obtained a knowledge of the
antidote. The forbearance of the captain had favored this impression,
and it was determined in consultation to use our weapons to the full
extent of their destructiveness. An opportunity was soon offered, for in
passing a raft lodged on the eastern shore Waantha pointed out a rampart
of logs ready poised for an overthrow, with interstices between in which
were seen the protruding muzzles of their blow-pipes. One of the
mountain howitzers loaded with solid shot was discharged point-blank
against the upper tier causing it to fall inward, catching the lurking
savages in their own trap, while it exposed those in the rear to the
full effect of grape and our small arms, which caused the river echoes
to resound with the yells of the wounded. Without stopping to learn the
extent of the slaughter, the steamer kept on her course. In passing a
glade reaching to the water the plain was seen covered with panic-
stricken savages on foot and horseback, directing their course to the
foot-hills. Although surprised at the large number collected, we felt
safe with the impression that the wood rafts of the left bank would be
left free for our acceptance thereafter.

_June 14._—While collecting wood from the scattered lodgments of the
western bank, parties of mounted Indians watched our movements from the
opposite plain. These Waantha informed us were of his own tribe. When
asked if he would like to be set on shore to rejoin them, he expressed,
with signs, a reproachful negative, blended with fear and sorrow. After
a moment’s hesitation he seemed to understand that the proposal was made
to test his feelings, then with a pleased look of Indian cunning he
pointed to the old chief, who had been regarding him with a revengeful
look of ferocity. Understanding his meaning as a proposal of
substitution, Mr. Welson asked, through Aabrawa, if they would kill the
old chief if set on shore? This was answered with a decided negative,
and the pantomimic addenda of labor as a substitute for death. As the
captive was sufficiently recovered from his wounds to control his own
movements, Mr. Welson took him in charge for initiatory preparation in
presage for association with his foes on shore. That it might not, in
form, be considered an arbitrary expedient for riddance, after Mr. Parry
had fitted to his neck a brass collar, proof to Indian appliances for
removal, he was freed from his bonds under the supervision of Mr.
Welson, who offered him his choice between the continued hospitalities
of the steamer, or liberty, such as he might be able to secure from his
congeners on either bank of the river? The speedy announcement of his
choice was urged by three strong shocks of the battery. When his
agitating consternation had sufficiently subsided from the last
talismanic touch to his neck decoration, his head disappeared over the
bulwarks with his heels in reversion, giving farewell nods to his
civilized entertainers. When last seen beneath the water’s surface he
was making for the eastern shore with a frog’s exampled despatch.

The kind-hearted readers will be unnecessarily excited, if from the
foregoing relation they are inclined to think our enactments were
dictated solely for the gratification of instinctive mirth. Mr. Welson’s
object was to obtain a clear demonstration of instinct in the
rudimentary foundation of habit as the source of progressive inclination
in its bearings upon the present standard of civilization. The
participation of the padre in the vague terrors of the savage from a
reciprocation in kind, from the two extremes of cultivated progression,
offered absolute evidence of a common origin and source of provocation,
the variations in expression being dependent upon practiced habits and
customs. The padre attempted to offer his own experience to subvert the
ferocious testimony of the old savage while under the effects of
whiskey, pleading that it had ever exerted an opposite influence with
him, exciting in its action a genial flow of sympathy. This partial
testimony was overruled by the acknowledgment that in social whiskey
bouts, indulged in as night passatempos, he had invariably been obliged
to act as a peaceful arbitrator. With the impression made from the
effects of whiskey on the savage, all our habits of indulgence were
curtailed, greatly to the advantage of kindly reciprocation which had
often been chilled by theoretical disputations that ended as they began,
in the void of instinctive mutation.




                               CHAPTER V.


The constantly increasing perils of the voyage from the pertinacity of
our savage foes, recalled the warning words of an old priest of Santa
Anna who had engaged in one of the Jesuitical expeditions. He advised us
to keep at a safe distance from the shore, and never attempt to hold
friendly intercourse with the savages, or endeavor to conciliate them
with presents, as it would expose us to their deadly treachery. “You
must be constant in your guard or they will board you in the night, for
they are as familiar with darkness and water as the land. If they come
within reach of your guns kill and spare not, for fear, if you can
inspire it, will be your only source of safety.” Our daily experience
had thus far confirmed the prudence of his advice, and it was yet a
question of extreme hazard if we should attempt to land. Each day
afforded additional evidence that the tribes were banded together in a
defensive alliance against the whites, with a politic foresight that
made intertribal jealousies secondary to their exclusion. When partisan
ferocity, so deadly in manifestation with the aboriginal races of
America, could be made to coalesce for protection against the aggressive
tendencies of a race in customs and habits inimical to their own, it
seemed an act of desperation to attempt the farther prosecution of our
Quixotic enterprise. This feeling had perceptibly gained strength while
the ferocious characteristics of the old savage remained unsubdued,
under the impression that our vitality was held with a lease as
precarious as his own. The padre’s exhibition of fear had established
him in the belief that in stoical courage we were inferior to his own
race. This impression he had evidently found means to convey to his
tribe. But Mr. Welson had, by a seemingly chance train of humorous
experiment, dissipated his reliance upon the savage hypothesis of
instinctive sagacity. The fancied superiority of his exaltation realized
to the old chief the attributes of deity, while the padre became
reduced, in his estimation, to a kindred caste with his tribe. In train
the gyved circlet of his neck, as a talismanic badge of investment,
would be likely to afford material evidence in proof of Mr. Welson’s
deistical power. These impressions, which it would be natural for him to
impart, would prove ominous as a prestige of awe, similar in effect to
that afforded by Moses to the Israelites. The contrast between the old
chief and Waantha discovered a marked distinction in tribal caste,
dependent upon the miasmatic influence exerted by local impressions
derived from degrees of purity in the sources of exhalation that gave
birth to kindred habits and customs. The former devoted his attention to
engendered animosity, while the latter eagerly searched for some token
of kindly sympathy, and when it was bestowed his whole being became
instinct with grateful pleasure. Even the dogs evinced an inherent
perception of Waantha’s higher grade by fawning acknowledgment, while
with the old chief the defiant acrimony increased rather than
diminished. In habits the same characteristic features prevailed. In
eating the old savage used as little ceremony as the dogs, and far less
in the modest observance of the other requirements of nature; while the
younger seemed to derive intense pleasure from cleanly imitations. With
these instinctive demonstrations we will resume our descriptive course.

                  *       *       *       *       *

_June 17._—The three previous days passed without any active indications
on the part of our tracking foes, but during the twilight dawn of this
morning Waantha discovered parties crossing the river in advance from
the right to the left bank. With every safe opportunity fuel was renewed
to guard against unforeseen emergencies. At noon large bodies of Indians
were seen watching our progress from eminences inland, and the trees of
either shore. Their appearance caused M. Hollydorf to question his duty
in opposition to the prospect the adventure offered for the fulfillment
of his commission. All, with the exception of Mr. Dow, expressed
themselves in terms of discouragement. Dr. Baāhar depicted the horrors
of a death from putrefactive poison, which entailed in life the
lingering corruption of bodily decomposition, which even the vultures
would disdain to hasten. Mr. Dow was obliged to acknowledge that the
preoccupation of their thoughts, while engaged in field avocations,
would expose them to certain surprise, and inevitable extermination. But
he had set his heart upon the venture and pleaded the advantage that
would accrue from the river’s exploration, hoping for some chance
interposition for the furtherance of his enterprise. Captain Greenwood,
for the relief of Mr. Dow, proposed that the exploration of the river
should be continued as far as admissible for the safety of the steamer.
M. Hollydorf accepted this proviso, notwithstanding the loss of time it
would cause.

_June 19._—While the captain and M. Hollydorf were engaged with the
calculation of their meridian observations, just as the steamer was
closing a long reach, Waantha hobbled aft in great excitement, pointing
with energetic gesticulation to a headland we were approaching, and then
to our guns on the forecastle deck. Interpreting some new emprise on the
part of our savage foes, the boat was kept in the centre of the current,
until the view opened beyond the headland, when in melée encounter were
seen parties on horseback. On nearer approach women and children were
discovered huddled together within a barrier of mules and horses. Parry,
the engineer, always prompt with his weapon, sounded a parley, which
caused a momentary cessation of hostilities, allowing the boat to gain a
position commanding a full view of the parties engaged. A glance, aided
by the imploring gestures of the women, whose garments and other
indications bespoke an approach to civilized origin, at once enlisted
the inclination of our sympathy. The novelty of a scene so unexpected,
rendered us for a moment undecided how to act, but the sound of
Antonio’s Chinese weapon restored our presence of mind. The Indians
quickly recovering from the momentary panic, caused by the shriek of the
whistle and clangor of the gong, engaged in a renewed charge upon the
unfortunates, who were defending their families with the desperation of
despair, and in numbers seemed scarcely one to ten of their foes. The
charge of the Indians was accompanied with a derisive whoop, this was
almost simultaneously echoed back by the bray of the mules opposed in
forlorn hope, which revived Mr. Dow’s with a realizing perception of the
ways and means for the achievement of his ambitious project. His rifle
had reported the death of four Indians before a general volley put the
survivors to flight. The rescued, when they saw the Indians fall and
themselves spared, hastened down the bank that they might not interpose
their bodies as shields to the savages. The panic of the Indians who
were in flight over the pampa was increased by a shell, the report of
the gun startling from the western shore a party lying in wait for the
issue of the battle on the eastern, with the probable hopes of a chance
advantage to themselves. Acting upon the hint that there were among them
those who had witnessed the effect of shot and shell on a former
occasion, the opportunity was embraced for reviving the impression. When
satisfied that all able to molest had carried their bodies out of range,
preparations were made for landing to succor the rescued with food and
raiment, for they appeared to be in a deplorable condition.

Before landing for the personal expression of sympathy, the punt was
loaded with provisions and dispatched to allay the immediate cravings of
hunger. The steamer in the meantime was moored to a wood-rift, from
which the captain and members of the corps gained the shore. They were
received by a man past the middle age, whose face was exceedingly
attractive, although wan with fatigue and anxiety. Momentarily
embarrassed, as if with doubt of his capacity to make his emotions of
gratitude intelligible, he bowed himself down with the intention of
prostrating himself at the feet of the captain, but this act of
humiliation was arrested by the grasp and hearty shake of his hands. As
distress evokes compassionate emotions with the kind-hearted, the
captain’s eyes were not alone mindful in the reciprocation of the
stranger’s outburst of grateful tears. Quick in demonstration, when his
generous impulses were aroused, the captain exceeded the cautious
discretion that usually guarded his movements, from fear of imposition,
by bestowing a hearty embrace of sympathy upon the careworn guardian of
the rescued flock. This act caused, with one exception, a general
prostration accompanied with a grateful outburst of tears. The exception
to this indicative act of eastern humiliation, bestowed alike in
reverence to the tyrant and benefactor, was a maiden who had probably
numbered eighteen seasons. Tall and erect in stature, she stood
unmindful of the prostrate throng, but not unmoved by the scene enacted
between the representative leaders of the rescuers and rescued. The
clear transparency of her skin, with the healthy purity of its texture,
combined with a graceful form, exceeding in height those with whom she
was associated, declared her at once alien to them by birth. Seemingly
aware that grateful expressions confined to pantomimic enactment would
at the close of the introductory scene prove embarrassing, she advanced,
after securing with touch the companionship of two young maidens who had
prostrated themselves beside her. Approaching Captain Greenwood, she
addressed him in an unknown tongue, which M. Hollydorf with surprise
recognized as an idiom of the Latin language. His wonder was augmented
by her confident assumption that there were among us some who would be
able to converse with her, and through her interpretation would be
enabled to hold communication with her protectors, her companions
speaking a dialect in remote correspondence with her own. The captain,
although gratefully recompensed for his lack of language by the eyes of
the fair vision, felt himself unaccountably moved in his isolation,
notwithstanding she continued to bestow upon him from those members
sympathetic admiration exceeding the compass of speech. The maiden
announced herself as a native of Heraclea of the Falls, a walled city
but a few days’ travel remote.

“My name,” she continued, “is Correliana Adinope, daughter of the Prætor
Adinope, in body deceased, and step-daughter to Adestus the present
Prætor. The city has sustained a constant siege for centuries by the
savages in revenge for the wrongs committed against them by our
ancestors. Its inhabitants are at the present time in the extremity of
distress from pestilence engendered by famine. While endeavoring to
obtain remedial plants without the city walls I was made prisoner by a
band of our besiegers, and was rescued immediately by these fugitives,
whom in turn you have saved from destruction.”

Having satisfied in outline the curiosity of M. Hollydorf, she begged
that safe means of rest might be afforded her protectors, for they had
been constantly harassed for weeks without an hour’s undisturbed sleep.
But long before the preparations were completed for a comfortable
resting place, Correliana and the wounded were the only ones that
remained awake.

Waantha, assisted by the guacâcioes of the crew, collected from the hair
and mouths of the dead Indians antidotes, and from the growths of the
river bank counteractive remedies, which relieved the excruciating pain
of the wounded, and stayed the progress of gangrenous putrefaction. At
sunset all the rescued were in a deep lethargic sleep, and as the night
was pleasant, and the glade where they lay was open to the river, with a
day draught that freed it from miasm, but little fear was apprehended
from their exposure, notwithstanding the tattered condition of their
clothing. Fortunately, before the evening was far advanced, the captain
bethought himself of his trading stock, from which he soon obtained
fabrics well adapted for their protection. Mr. Dow, restored to the full
vigor of ambitious vitality, busied himself in organizing a guard for
the protection of the mules and horses, listening the while to Aabrawa’s
relation of their owner’s source, for he had recognized them as
belonging to a colony located far to the eastward of his place of
nativity, who were known to his people by the name of Bamboyles. Mr. Dow
viewing his night charge as the keys destined to unlock the gates of his
New Jerusalem, he picketed them in the most verdant portion of the
glade. When morning dawned his fears were startled to find them still
prone with scarcely a sign of vitality; and as his attempts to arouse
them failed to elicit more than a drowsy snort he feared that with all
his vigilance they had been poisoned, but was reassured by Dr. Baāhar,
who pronounced their immobile condition as lethargic, induced from
hunger and fatigue.

While the night dew was still on the foliage Waantha pointed to a long
line of animals approaching the river from the plain, which proved to be
llamas. Upon this hint the three marksmen took the steamer’s boat to
find their “toch,” or path to the river, and were successful in securing
a supply of game sufficient for several days’ consumption. Before his
guests awoke the captain had prepared a tent for the reception of the
women and children, and an abundance of food for all. In addition he was
able to furnish from his trading stock dresses, which, with a little
alteration, would supply the requirements of the women.

The mayorong, or chief of the Bamboyles, and Correliana were the first
to awake in the morning; the latter, with her two companions, were
conducted to the tent and there presented with the means of renewing
their garments. In communicating the kindly expressions bestowed, with
the gifts, her companions, in returning thanks, used the Spanish idiom,
which startled Mr. Welson with pleasurable surprise, as it opened to him
a direct avenue of speaking intercourse, for its varied provincialisms
were as familiar to him as his patrial mother tongue. After the
agreeable confusion, occasioned by Mr. Welson addressing them in
Spanish, had subsided, the eldest introduced herself as Cleorita and her
sister as Oviata Arcos, daughters of Don Santiago Arcos, a native of
Madrid, the chief city of Spain. On hearing this announcement he became
joyfully elated, bestowing upon both a fond recognition, as they were
the daughters of a personal friend of former years. After a long
conversation, in which they gave him an outline history of their people,
and the cause that forced them to become wandering exiles from their
loved country, with the distressful mishaps which had attended their
search for a new home, they separated reluctantly for the day. In answer
to Mr. Welson’s sympathetic desire to render burial assistance in the
regretful disposal of their dead relatives, the mayorong replied, that
unless their preservers especially wished to be present they would
prefer to indulge in their sorrows alone. Readily understanding the
motive, Mr. Welson and associates returned to the steamer while the
ceremonies were in progress.

As Waantha had discovered Indian scouts lurking above and below upon
either bank of the river, Mr. Dow exercised his engineering skill in
forming on the pampa a defensive redoubt for the night protection of the
horses and mules. Dr. Baāhar theoretically explained the Latin
nomenclature of the different departments of the Roman castrum, which
possessed from his natural and cultivated innocence from mechanical
attaint the supreme “virtue” of novelty. Mr. Dow submitted to his
classical dictations, but stoutly refused to adopt his method of
fortification, which the doctor styled _fossa cingere internus_, or
moating inside of the redoubt, notwithstanding the strongly urged
advantage of its strategic intention of concealment, that would lead the
savages, on gaining the summit of the embankment, to take a blind leap
into it. Fortunately the padre was present to divert the argument, which
enabled him to render practical assistance to his Bamboyle aids for the
completion of the inclosure in time for the night’s occupation. The
absence of the doctor and padre from the supper table caused the captain
to inquire where they were? Mr. Dow said that he had left them but a
short time previous seated on the sods of the embankment engaged in a
dogmatic discussion of the feasibility of the various methods adopted by
the ancients and moderns for citadel defense, the doctor quoting from
“Plutarch’s Lives” and the padre from Bunyan’s “Holy War” as the best
English authority. Aggravated by the heedless lack of sympathy shown in
the use of their tongues, the while withholding the useful aid of their
hands, the captain, on their appearance, reprimanded the doctor over the
padre’s shoulders with tart severity, which caused both to give heed to
the practical suggestions of Mr. Welson in train for the outfit of the
overland expedition. From the direction of Correliana, who seemed to
have an innate perception of her entertainers’ dispositions, the captain
concluded to continue the voyage up the river to a point she described
as more favorable for debarkation, as it was nearer the southern passes
of the mountains that opened a way to the city of Heraclea.

_June 21._—After the morning meal a majority of the women and children
were brought on board of the steamer, and of the males all that would be
likely to impede the progress of the land party having in charge the
horses and mules. When ready for the start, the doctor joined the shore
party equipped in naturalistic costume, which, in defiance of the recent
sad experiences of the Bamboyle women, excited a mirthful inclination;
even the more sedate demeanor of Correliana was moved in despite of her
efforts to suppress her risible emotions. With his nether bifurcations
disappearing, in extremity, within the capacious leg receptacles of
boots, a blouse surcoat, or smock frock, elaborately supplied with
Sanskrit labeled pockets, depended loosely from his shoulders, reaching
to his knees, his head being surmounted with a bell-crowned hat,
bestudded with impaling pins, technically called the kaleidoscope.
Protruding from the larger pockets were seen the mouths of a pistol
barrel, powder and drinking horns, with various articles for insect
preservation.

Aware of his uncouth presentment, he pleaded that its adoption combined
usefulness with policy, for he had noted in his travels that all tribes
and nations bowed down in reverential worship and awe to ugliness; and
he felt certain that he had often been indebted to the contributions of
his costume for the preservation of his life, while sojourning among the
natives of the Polynesian and Ladrone Islands. When fairly mounted upon
a mule, who seemed to be affected with emotions peculiar to his species,
but seemingly averse to awe and worshipful respect, Mr. Welson could not
refrain from commending the happy conjunction as talismanic for the
rider’s preservation from savage attacks.

It required much coaxing on the part of the mayorong to reconcile the
mule to the novel eccentricities of its rider, but in the course of the
forenoon he seemed to enter into the humor of his direction with unusual
zest. When fully reconciled to the swaying of the doctor’s net, with the
sharp turns and checks to which he was subjected in the chase of
insects, the Bamboyles left them to the full sway of their own moods.
Fortunately the saddle was well adapted to secure the safety of its
occupant. As they were crossing the opening of a glade, when the day was
well advanced, a splendid specimen of the pampa _Nyctaloide_ hovered
over the cavalada long enough to attract the doctor’s attention, then
floated away, leisurely, over the plain. In a moment the insect-hunter’s
net was in hand and, before he could be checked with warning caution,
was under full headway in pursuit, and, when fully engaged in following
the doublings of his quarry, he became deaf to the mayorong’s calls.
Feeling secure in being able to keep within hail of the boat, the
erratic movements of the doctor had been a source of amusement to the
Bamboyles, but as the distance was narrowing between the foot-hills and
the river, and withal hummocky, his danger increased. Still he was
armed, and little fear was entertained for his safety, for while within
call his mule could be brought back with a whistle. As he still kept
heedlessly on, the mayorong sent a party of young men to bring him back.
They had scarcely started, when a shrill shout from the mayorong urged
them on, he and Mr. Dow following at full speed. The cause of these
movements was a pursuing Indian close in the wake of the doctor.
Unheedful of the danger, the doctor and his mule—who seemed to enjoy the
novelty of the chase with his rider’s gusto—neared the foot-hills, where
a band of Indians were seen watching the strange scene. His frantic
gesticulations had undoubtedly impressed them with the belief that he
was bestraught with madness; a condition held in especial reverence by
aboriginals,—as they continued to regard the movements of the Indian in
pursuit with negligent indifference; indeed, from his frequent
hesitations, when within the cast of a spear, he seemed to be subject to
the restraining influence of the same fear. The mayorong, who had
allowed Mr. Dow to overtake him, had twice discharged his rifle in hopes
that the report would apprise the doctor of his danger, so that he might
use his pistol. But these offensive demonstrations only aggravated his
danger, for the band of Indians moved rapidly forward for the rescue of
their scout; he at the same time, warned by the rifle reports, cast a
calculating glance backward to determine the extent of his own danger.
At this juncture the butterfly rose and doubled just without the range
of the distracted enthusiast’s net, then coquetted backward and forward
with all the instinctive blandishments of its human type, showing as
little concern for threatened danger as its pursuer. This tack brought
the doctor face to face with his foe, who had sprung upright upon the
croup of his horse, holding his spear poised ready for the cast. The
cool indifference of the doctor to this offensive act, although within
reach of the spear’s thrust, caused the savage to pause, backing his
horse out of the way, as if still doubting the sanity of his meditated
victim’s self-possession. In this act a bullet with the mayorong’s
novice aim startled the savage from the close proximity of its whizz, as
he started suddenly aside. A quick glance turned toward us determined
the doctor’s fate just as he succeeded in capturing the tantalizing
object of his chase. While in the act of lowering the staff of his net
to remove his prize, he received the blow from the cast of the spear
aimed at the unprotected portion of his head; the point glancing upward
upon the skull divided the scalp on the forehead, reflecting it backward
over the crown. The blow forced him backward from the saddle to the
ground; at this stage Mr. Dow brought his rifle to bear, which caused
the savage to bite the dust, just as he was about to finish his victim
with a spear thrust. The blow and report brought back the doctor’s
scattered senses in time to anticipate with his pistol an attempt upon
his throat from the teeth of the Indian’s no less savage horse, for the
completion of his dead master’s unfinished work. This instinctive
impulse of self-preservation announced the presence of the doctor’s
mind, and that he still survived, but the horse, deprived of life, fell
forward over his prostrate body, as if to accomplish in death his
defunct master’s intention. When dragged from beneath the horse Dr.
Baāhar looked as if he had been resurrected from a slaughter-house, but
he was a naturalist still, for his first thoughts were directed to his
captured butterfly. A more striking contrast could scarcely be imagined
than that presented by the captor and captured, the former being clothed
in blood and the latter in beauty, for it had escaped injury in the
conflict. After the doctor had examined the condition of his hat with
its contents and garnish of insects, he submitted his head to the
mayorong’s treatment, with the proviso that his restored scalp should be
swathed without washing. When mounted on his mule his appearance was as
fruitful of humorous mirth as those attending the most ludicrous mishaps
of the valorous knight of La Mancha. The Indians, after the mayorong’s
party left, held a consultation over the dead body of their scout, which
seemed to result in a determination to avenge his death, for the main
body, which outnumbered ours in the ratio of three to one, followed,
standing on croup in a menacing attitude, occasionally making a dash
forward, and as suddenly retreating. These maneuvers were continued for
an hour or more, serving to retard the progress of the cavalada, until
Mr. Dow, our rear guard, getting out of patience with their annoyance,
proposed a long shot with his Spencer rifle which in effect astonished
the Indians by dismounting one of the most defiant. This caused evident
dismay, for they immediately retreated with all speed to the foot-hills,
leaving us unmolested for the rest of the day’s stage. Notwithstanding
the delays of the land party, they were obliged to wait at the first
open glade until night-fall for the arrival of the steamer. After the
doctor had submitted to a thorough ablution of body and head,
administered by the Bamboyle women, the cause of the steamer’s delay was
explained.

The steamer, after an hour’s progress from her night’s moorage, entered
a broad expanse of water of lake-like dimensions formed by a confluent
tributary from the west. The strong eddy caused by the making out of a
spit from the eastern bank forced the boat to the opposite shore covered
with the rank growths common to extensive alluvial deposits in semi-
tropical latitudes. While the engine was exerting its utmost power to
stem the current and cross the walled strength of the combined streams,
Waantha, who was at his post with his canine friends, called Mr.
Welson’s attention by signs to a broad spreading mangrove banian
peculiar to the tributary deltas of the large South American rivers,
which bear a strong resemblance to kindred growths in India. Among the
pendant hybrid limbs, which had taken root in the muddy deposit, there
appeared one that seemed to vibrate to and fro, coiling upon itself.
With the glass the captain discovered that it was a huge amphibious
anaconda hanging pendant from one of the horizontal branches by the
prehensile attachment of its tail. The waving excitement of its
corrugations and swaying reflection of its head from side to side,
within circumscribed limits, aroused the spectators’ curiosity to learn
the nature of its attraction. A nearer approach discovered, prone upon
the interwoven platform of mangrove branches, a huge alligator with his
head inward from the river. The reptile relation of the parties
foreboded an instinctive encounter of sagacity and strength, which
excited in Mr. Welson a strong repulsive desire to witness, as a
comparative study, the result of a duel between individual
representatives of species so nearly allied on the cold blooded verge of
vitality. The captain, in order to afford him the privilege of recording
the result for future reference, directed the bow of the boat cautiously
toward the scene of encounter.

When sufficiently near to witness the movements of the monsters, who
were engaged in preliminary tactics, one to prevent insinuating
surprise; for the alligator, from his shrinking contractions, was
evidently aware of the impending danger, if his foe was allowed to gain
his object, and the other to excite the advantage he wished to gain, the
headway of the boat was checked. As the distance intervening was
shortened, the scaly tail, back, and immense snout of the alligator,
were exposed to view in sidelong reflection within the umbrageous
shadow, proclaiming him the patriarchal champion of his species, and
well matched in strength to contend with his ophidian foe, should he,
from tantalizing banter, proceed to actual hostilities. Gradually the
serpent’s curves and retractions grew more energetic in gliding movement
as its head darted hither and thither, now disappearing on one side of
the saurian, then retracting over his back for an investigation of the
opposite side, with the evident object of seeking a passage beneath. The
alligator, although passive in his defensive movements, was observed to
crouch closer to the underlying branches whenever the head of his foe
touched a part beneath the scales of his armor, his apprehension being
made manifest by a nervous twitching of his tail, as if aware of the
fatal vantage sought.

The captain had requested the engineer to keep the steamer in position
until the victor in the duelistic contest was determined; but the
wariness of the alligator, who was not in a position to accept the wager
of battle, made the result of the siege doubtful, as it might be
prolonged until they had tested their respective powers of total
abstinence to the extent of endurance. With the thought of his own
culpability should the gratification of Mr. Welson’s curiosity prove
fatal to the hopes of Correliana, who had placed her reliance in his
direction for the relief of her kindred, he was about to request the
engineer, who acted as pilot, to proceed, when the pagan exclamation
proh Jupiter! from the object of his thoughts called attention to the
cause. The alligator had attempted to gain the advantage of his
preferred element by a backward movement, this act had opened to the
head of his foe the sought for advantage, which had already passed
underneath his body between his dwarfed legs before his hind quarters
reached the water. In a twinkling two coils had involved the saurian’s
body just behind his fore legs, the part most susceptible to wounds and
compression. Then came a fearful struggle that swayed the tree
attachments through the wide expanse of its reach, causing in the minds
of the beholders a loathsome interest devoid of sympathy, offering the
test of instinctive strength and endurance as a meagre source of
gratification. Still, to Mr. Welson, the contest was not altogether
devoid of useful application for parallel deduction when compared with
the animal traits of human instinct. The tightening of the prehensile
coil of the anaconda’s tail on the limb of its attachment, and upward
retractile corrugations of his body with corresponding attenuation,
disclosed the difficulty he encountered from the elasticity of his
leverage, which prevented the concentration of muscular strength
necessary for the strangulation of his victim. To the elasticity of the
limb the alligator owed his prolonged existence and chance of
advantageous retrieval. At this stage of doubtful emergency the
instinctive “wisdom” of the serpent became meditatively apparent in the
darting movements of his head and gleam of his watchful eyes, which were
engaged in alert study to advantage his position, while guarding his
straining body from the frantic strokes of the tail and distended jaws
of his antagonist. The anaconda’s intention was soon made manifest, for
we could plainly see his corkscrew tail traveling with insidious
progress toward one of the main trunks of the tree; this once gained the
moments of the saurian’s existence could be numbered, for it would
afford the required resistance for crushing his body in its armor of
proof. The “spectators” had watched the conflict with a superlative
degree of indifference, inasmuch as favor for either of the contestants
was concerned, hoping that both would be fatally disabled. But the
moment the alligator began to manifest symptoms of exhaustion in the
weakened strokes of its tail, and gasping throes, the human instinct of
a guacho fireman sided with the weaker party in the struggle. Yet the
object of his championship was scarcely a shade less repulsive than the
symbolic cause of man’s squirming meanness and disposition to involve in
his folds of treachery all that adventure within the reach of his
cupidity. The alligator’s champion, born and nursed in the saddle with
the lariat and bola for his rattle, asked the captain, in an undertone,
for the skiff, with permission to terminate the combat. This granted he
soon gained a footing upon the mangrove thicket and in a few seconds the
quick gleam of a machéte was seen, then with the accompaniment of a
prolonged hiss the serpent’s writhing body fell separated from its tail.
Relaxing the portion inclosing his nearly lifeless victim, he strove
with instinctive energy to release his folds, but his efforts were vain,
for the retractile power of his muscles had departed with his tail.
Helplessly retained by the dead weight of the alligator’s body, the
serpent seemed at a loss to account for the futile result of his
efforts, for he continued to retract his bereaved stump, while
investigating with darting head the progress effected by vermicular
contraction beneath. The reviving spasms of the alligator increased the
anxious rapidity of the anaconda’s movements, but as with the fabled
flight of Samson’s strength shorn of his locks, he was held for
sacrifice bound in the toils of his own instinctive intention. His
helpless condition was aggravated by the guacho, who, after cutting away
the intervening branches, was seen struggling with the writhing tail
until he had drawn it to an overreaching limb, from which he dropped it
within reach of the head of its late owner. Its detached appearance
seemed to impress upon the majority, of the relict anaconda, the
diminished extent of his misfortune, for it was seized with its late
mouth and bitten with impotent rage. While engaged in inflicting
punishment upon its supposed traitorous tail, instinctive caution was
made blind with rage, and its coils, released by the recovered
consciousness of the alligator, convolved athwart between his open jaws
which seized and severed the serpent’s body while its head was
endeavoring to execute ultimate vengeance by swallowing its recreant
tail. M. Hollydorf and Mr. Welson closed the scene and the alligator’s
repast with their rifles, the bullets taking effect in the soft parts
which were exposed in his endeavors to regain the water. With this
humane addenda to the reptile duel, the serpent’s head was left to
shuffle off from its mortal coil. Correliana Adinope and the Bamboyle
women had screened themselves from the revolting sight under the awning
aft, from which they could not be induced to look backward until the
scene of the duel was left far behind. The steamer, to make good the
time lost, was urged to her best speed. With the relation of these
retarding incidents of the day, Antonio announced his readiness to serve
the evening meal.




                              CHAPTER VI.


Cleorita Arcos, at the request of her grandfather, the mayorong, gave
the following relation of the causes that led to their exile:—

“As Aabrawa has informed you, our people have received the name of
Bamboyles from the Aurancanoes. This was derived from the noise of our
workmen’s hammers in mending their utensils. But our transmitted, and
more pleasing name of designation, which we hold in reverence as an
evidence of remote ancestry, is Kyronese. Our late place of residence is
called Pompolio, which is also of remote hereditary origin. Mendoza was
said to have been founded by our ancestors, from which their more recent
descendants were driven by the Spanish half-breeds who coveted their
vineyards, which produced excellent grapes for the manufacture of wine,
of which they were fond to excess. Their envious hatred followed the
victims of displacement to Pompolio, their new home, and still
continues. Our ancestors were also beset by wandering tribes of savages
in their new home, as determined for our destruction as those from which
we were rescued by your timely arrival. But as they were constantly at
war among themselves it gave our people an opportunity to build walls
and gates to defend the passes.

“The Aurancanians were always friendly, for our people never exacted
more for their labors than their employers were pleased to give in
exchange; and until the event occurred that caused us to become outcasts
from our dearly loved homes, they were ever more ready to bestow than we
were to accept. But the same cause, from the same source, has reduced
them to a condition worse than our own, for they can no longer command
themselves in their own country, being constantly at variance in their
own households. We are so unlike our neighbors, and their visitors from
other nations, in personal appearance, habits, and customs, our
curiosity has labored long and patiently with the transmitted emblems,
but they refuse to unravel the secrets of the past.

“My father gave our people much information, which they supposed to be
reliable. First, he said that Kyron, from which our name was derived,
was an ancient Assyrian department, which gave birth to the city of
Sidon, famed in its day for the boldness and enterprise of its
navigators; and that the vessels portrayed by our ancestors were similar
to theirs. But he said that our short bows, and spears, as well as our
defensive armor, afforded the strongest confirmation of Assyrian origin.
In addition, he found utensils designed for household use which
corresponded exactly with pictures in the books he obtained from Europe;
and furthermore, he made a journey to Peru and brought back vessels of
pottery exactly similar. From these evidences he naturally concluded
that our ancestry, and those that inter-married with the aboriginal
inhabitants of Peru, were derived from the same source. However, you
will understand all these things better than ourselves; for he said your
learned men devoted their lives to the study of the past, and were
skilled in tracing vestiges, and conjectural probabilities.

“From what I have related, you can judge of the past, and from what I
shall now relate, whether we have acted prudently, and are worthy of the
interest you are disposed to take in our welfare. We lived happily
according to our knowledge, neither eating or drinking what we
considered to be impure, or indulging to excess beyond the body’s
requirements for the gratification of taste. Our amusements were
harmless and serving as a vivacious warmth for affectionate love. Those
who visited us, like my father, were kindly entertained, and not one of
the few has disdained to accept our friendship. The cause of my father’s
departure was not that he loved us less, but the wish to induce his
father and brother to come and see that he had succeeded in finding a
people who were content to live without money, in freedom from want and
envy, with the security of a common affection to make them realize a
more perfect existence after the separation of vitality from the body.
It was our misfortune to lose him when his advice was most needed, for
we feel assured, if he had remained, he would have averted our
calamities, for he claimed that our goodness and simplicity invited
imposition, which we had not the diplomatic skill to avoid.”

Mr. Welson, with a humorous twinkle of the eye, interrupted Cleorita,
questioning whether her father explained the meaning of the word
diplomatic. To which she replied with blushing trepidation, “My father
gave his own version, but he was so chioptic (jocose) in his way, and
inclined to speak disparagingly of his people’s sincerity, we did not
press him to asservate the truth of his interpretation, for we could not
wish to believe that civilization consisted in the art of successful
deception. As you knew him well in former years, I will not withhold his
exact definition. He said the word was a comprehensive cover for all the
variations of lying evasion practiced in the adjustment of national
encroachments, as a pretext for more extended impositions. The immediate
cause of our exile was the reappearance of a tribe of Indians who had
been expelled by the Aurancanians for their atrocious acts. The return
of the Abacknas (marauders) was announced by their sack of the
settlement of Guaspe. When pursued by an avenging party they fled to the
mountains. Their leader, named O’Grady, a sailor who had escaped from a
vessel in the straits of Magellan, betrayed them to the vengeance of
their pursuers, so that few escaped. By this act of treachery he gained
admittance into Aurancania for the introduction of a destructive cause
more insidious in its perfidy.

“In all the valleys of Aurancania the apple and pear grow to perfection,
and, as with us, those bordering the countries on the north and east are
well adapted for the culture of the grape and fruits kindred to the
peach. The extracted juice of these had been used as a pleasant and
harmless drink. O’Grady, although mistrusted, proposed to make the juice
more pleasing in its effects if suitable vessels could be procured. As
these were to be made of copper, of which we had an abundance, and were
skilled in reducing it for the manufacture of utensils, he was referred
to us. Unfortunately, on his way to visit us, he met one of our most
ingenious workers of the metals at Muloa, who comprehended the kind of
vessels and attachments he wanted. Insisting upon accompanying our
brother to oversee his labors, he gave him abundant reason on the way to
regret the chance that made him responsible for the stranger’s
introduction to our people. On their arrival within the gates of the
pass, he would not accept the hospitality provided for strangers, on
trial,—outside of our Douang, or walled town of defense, but insisted
that he should be received as a guest within. This act of aggressive
presumption was firmly but politely opposed by his sponsor, which from
his slight stature led to a trial of strength, with a result seriously
unfavorable to O’Grady, who was glad to accept assistance from his
antagonist and a bed in the strangers’ quarters, which he kept for a
month, until a fractured leg and an arm were again serviceable.
Nevertheless, he was kindly attended; and after his recovery never
attempted to overawe any of our people with threatening overtures
provoking personal encounter, having seemingly lost confidence in the
accounted advantages of superior size; but the revengeful leer of his
eyes boded us ill if the opportunity of exacting it should ever occur.
The vessel, with our troublesome visitor, were transported back to Muloa
as soon as he was able to travel; he neither offering, or his conductor
requiring aught for the labor or material bestowed, other than the
desire, on the part of our people, never to see him again. But the hopes
entertained that our parting would be final, were void; and in view of
the calamity which the heedless fulfillment of our brother’s stipulation
wrought upon the friendly Aurancanians, we have questioned whether our
own misfortunes were not justly merited.”

“Were you aware,” inquired Mr. Welson, “that the vessels your artizans
were fabricating were intended for the transformation of a beverage
juice into a fiery distillation, that in product would reduce your
friends to the condition of enemies to you, by the introduction of
‘civil’ discord into their own households?”

“The only information our people had upon the subject was derived from
my father,” replied Cleorita, “who had often described the misery it had
caused among your people. But his habits were abstemious, and his
example prevented the full impression of the danger, for we did not
forethink that others lacked his discretion, and would pervert actual
blessings for their own destruction. Alas, we soon found that the track
of our heedless labor was marked with the blight of provident affection.
To controvert our own agency in the misery inflicted upon the families
of our ever kind neighbors, the mayorong sent those abroad who mingled
substances with the ashes beneath the vessels that in burning destroyed
the metal. But the O’Grady had gained the means before this was
effected, of obtaining others from Mendoza of larger size, after we had
refused to supply his loss. These we also felt warranted in destroying,
which aroused his suspicions and his third enterprise was carefully
guarded. When its product exceeded the demand, he sent a still over to
Pompolio and seized our fruit for its use, which caused our people to
destroy it openly, expelling his aids. This provoked his bitter enmity,
and he swore that he would exterminate our people root and branch.

“Two years passed without cause for alarm, when, with a morning’s dawn,
we were aroused by the boom of a great gun and a loud crash in the midst
of our houses. When rushing forth to learn the cause the gatekeeper gave
the mayorong a letter written in Mendozean Spanish which I translated.
The missive was a demand for the immediate surrender of the Douang,
unconditionally. In the event of refusal, the lives of all the males
were to be sacrificed. This was signed, ‘Patrick O’Grady, Commander-in-
chief.’

“Of course, without hesitation, our people put on a bold face and sent
him back a defiant answer. In less than an hour our gate became a mark
for the cannon. This we had anticipated, and a second gate prepared for
an emergency of the kind, was closed inside of the outer, the interspace
being filled with faggots of osiers and tough mountain moss. So that our
second gate was well protected, for they kept prudently out of reach of
our spring-engines which were almost as effectual as their guns, but
could not be directed as easily. But our people were sorely
disheartened, for he had brought with him a large band of the guachos
and Indians of the plains, who had often attempted similar enterprises.
Finding, after many days, that their guns were breaking through our
strong walls, our people determined to conceal in the mountain caves all
that was held valuable, leaving in charge of a band of our young men the
old and infirm, with our cattle; while the mayorong, with the majority
of the able-bodied of both sexes, should set forth to seek a new home
farther north. When all the arrangements were completed a passage was
opened in the southern wall opposite and in concealment from the
besiegers’ encampment, for the outgoing of our cattle, through the heap
of litter that had accumulated from our stables overthrown from the
wall. After our departure for the mountain strongholds, the way of
escape was again closed and concealed as before. When everything was
made ready for the departure of the mayorong’s party northward, they
resolved upon another night attack upon their foes for intimidation,
that they might not seek to molest the mountain party in reserve; but
with such precautions as could be used to prevent the loss of life on
our part. The success of our people, if it had been followed up,
promised a complete rout, so great was the panic they caused, but it
sufficed to render their guns useless, with the destruction of their
munitions, and such other damage as we could accomplish without hazard
to ourselves.

“With a sad farewell we set forth in search for a new place of
habitation. Encountering many hardships, we finally succeeded in
reaching the fruitful valleys to the north of Mendoza without the loss
of life, where a new race of foes have driven us hither and thither as
relentlessly determined upon our destruction as the O’Grady. When we
started, our men numbered an hundred and eighty, and our women and
children two hundred; these have been reduced by death and capture in
our long wanderings among savage foes, to ninety men, and an hundred and
twenty women and children. Twenty days ago we rescued our loved
companion, Correliana, in sight of her city, while her guards were
fighting bravely for her defense against overwhelming odds. For many
days we hovered in sight of the city, hoping to regain for her an
entrance into the gates; her friends understanding our intention
endeavored to render us all possible assistance, but it availed naught
for her advantage, but caused us great distress. Yet that she has been
the means of our preservation we doubt not; for without the support of
her undaunted courage and device, we should scarcely have been able to
elude the many schemes planned for our destruction and her capture. When
she found it was impossible to gain an entrance into the city, and we
were fainting for the want of food, she led us by devious ways to Indian
villages, left in charge of old men and women, where we obtained an
abundance of food without causing other injury. From that time we have
had no rest, except what we gained in the sillia while our horses were
moving. Her desire to keep the river in view has been so urgent that we
saw clearly she expected succor from it in some way. Although her
language corresponds with Spanish so closely as to furnish me with a
ready understanding in other matters, she was not disposed to impart the
nature of her hopes from this source. We are not greatly given to
superstition, nevertheless, we cannot rid ourselves of the grateful
belief that you were in some way overruled for our rescue.”

When Cleorita closed her relation the Kyronese women bowed themselves
down in grateful acknowledgment for their preservation. This act of
humility caused the padre to utter a remonstrance coupled with the
declaration that prostrate humbleness for human aid seemed to him an
affectation that smacked strongly of hypocrisy. But when reminded of the
obeisance paid to the pope’s toe, and similar absurd acts inculcated by
Christian doctrine in the education of youth subject to the bias of
sectarian supremacy, he was silenced. But all joined in expressing their
strong sympathy and proffers of aid in solace for the unmerited
sufferings of the Kyronese.




                              CHAPTER VII.


While Mr. Welson was engaged in listening to the rehearsal of the
proposed plans of Correliana for the speedy rescue of her people, a
falcon in the act of stooping from its poise attracted the quick eyes of
Mr. Dow, who raised his rifle, but before he could secure his aim the
Heraclean maid uttered an exclamation of alarm which arrested his
destructive purpose. In explanation and apology for her impetuous words
and act, the falcon settled from his waft upon her shoulder with a
flutter of glad recognition, coaxingly pecking at her ear with side
glances for accustomed caresses. In a few moments the fair perch became
so abstracted with varying emotions hovering between sorrow and
gladness, that her pet was fain to stoop to her wrist for the mechanical
recognition of the right hand; yet, as if unmindful of neglect, it
plumed itself in the pride of feathery vanity, seemingly confident
notwithstanding the reserved affection of its mistress.

At length, as if suddenly made aware of her preoccupation from the
silence that prevailed, she asked the privilege of retiring to the cabin
for a few minutes for the recovery of her composure. During her absence
Cleorita said that she had been similarly affected on several previous
occasions from falcon visits. Nearly an hour passed before Correliana
reappeared, then, with the pleading animation of anxiety, she requested
M. Hollydorf to urge all warrantable haste in preparation for the
overland journey from that point, if they proposed to rescue her people,
as they were in extremity from the increased virulence of the pestilence
aggravated by famine, of which the besieging savages were preparing to
take speedy advantage. Naturally supposing that the bird was the carrier
medium of communication, all their energies were exerted for the
accomplishment of her affectionate solicitation.

Mr. Dow, with Jack’s and Bill’s assistance, drilled the Kyronese in the
art of loading and discharging the howitzer, with effective aim, also in
the use of rifles and pistols. During the day hampers were filled with
prepared munitions and rations, and the party selected for the
expedition. Having assisted, with wonderful tact, during the process of
packing, just before night-fall Correliana dispatched the falcon in
homeward flight, with encouraging promises of speedy relief. When with
the approach of darkness, and fatigue, the labors of the day were
suspended, she pronounced herself anxious that we should become
acquainted with the history of her people, that we might judge of their
worth before venturing the hazard of our promised aid. With an assurance
of unwavering determination to adventure their lives for the rescue of
her kindred by all, she commenced her narration.

“The transmitted written history of our people, derived from our
ancestors of old Heraclea, has not been esteemed reliable by the later
renewed generations of our present City of the Falls, inasmuch as the
historians, of the middle period, were invariably inclined to ascribe
the partial prejudices of degeneration as evidences of progression in
their assumptive decisions of right and wrong. With self exaltation they
did not hesitate to extol the most arbitrary and licentious acts of
persons in power, which in accommodation for the selfish retention of
favor were constantly subject to reversion. These sources of selfish
contradiction, serve to impeach the veracity of the whole, so that from
the adventitious impressions of truth we have been obliged to make
conjectural deductions to subserve our desire for the preservation of a
probable outline record of the causeful events that led to ancestral
translation from the Pontine to the Iberian Heraclea. However, in my
prompted relation I shall endeavor to give a simple rendering agreeable
to the expressed judgment of our advisors, without attempting to force
your concurrence with reasoning similitudes. Your knowledge pertaining
to coincident history will certainly attest to the correctness of the
alleged source from which our remote ancestors were derived.

“Our original stock, in translation, might well be represented in the
variations of caste by the contingent elements with which I am at
present surrounded; for the place from which our ancestors embarked was
a central point for the fermenting commixture of the peoples and septs
of Asia, Europe, and Africa. Our patrician historian states that the
original stock were all derived from noble Roman families who were
emigrating, with collateral provincial branches, from the Euxine
Heraclea, in a Macedonian ship, to an Iberian city of the same name,
situated a short distance inland from the ocean opening of the straits
of Gades. After touching at the African port of Rusander Gaditarius for
supplies necessary for support during the interval of planting and
harvest, they set sail for their port of destination.

“When in sight of the landmarks of Heraclea, while offering sacrifice to
the gods of their worship, for the prosperous termination of their
voyage, a sudden tempest arose which forced their vessel out into the
broad Atlantic. For days the storm raged, while before it their bark was
driven heedless of mortal control, every moment threatening destruction.
At length, after hopeless despair had held them bound in shadowy
darkness through a lapse of time unmarked by the full distinctions of
day and night, the sun rose clear over a limitless expanse of waters.
Still they feared to offer thankful oblations, for they were drifting
they knew not whither. In the listless inactivity of despair they had
allowed the waters of heaven to accumulate in their vessel mixed with
the briny wash of the ocean. As the sun rose in the firmament to its
meridian, the heat parched their mouths with thirst, then they
recognized the providence of heaven for the supply of water tempered
with salt to make it unpalatable for excess.

“‘Again hope began to dawn, which was strengthened on the following
night by a flight of fish seemingly attracted by the altar fire, which
had continued to burn through the fearful tossings of the vessel when
impelled by the merciless tempest urged by the god of the ocean.
Revived, with the second sun, the sailors spread the vessel’s sails to a
favoring waft of the ocean wind, showing their recognition and
resignation to the decrees its providence had ordained. There was no
lack of food, for the supply obtained at Rusador for anticipated wants
between seedtime and harvest, more than sufficed for prospective
requirements, unless the ocean proved boundless. Of luxuries there was
also a bountiful supply; dates, dried figs, grapes, and Chian wine.
Strange as it may appear, with the revival of our hopes, a large portion
of the wine was sacrificed to furnish vessels for treasuring the water
preserved by the ship. But with the rising of the eleventh visible sun
all the supply of water having been exhausted,—for there were many
mouths and great thirst,—despair, which dried up the moisture, began its
reign of terror, from the moans of mothers who freely offered their
tears to still the wailing cries of their children.

“‘In this condition, when all coveted death to relieve the tortures of
thirst, there came on the sixteenth of its rise upon our forlorn hopes
at sundown, a waft that made all murmur thanks in their weakness. This
was followed with genial showers which brought a reviving consciousness
of an overruling presence inspiring a love of life and the blessings of
kindred affection. When the clouds, to whose timely benefactions we were
beholden for our preservation, were dispersed by the rising sun, our
eyes and hearts were gladdened with the sight of land, which called
forth tears with whispered rejoicings, and wan smiles of congratulation
bestowed with embraces, and hand pressures in thankful praise that we
had been once more permitted to see the element from which we had been
so long divorced by cruel fate.

“‘Borne onward by a gentle wind from the ocean, we entered a broad
estuary whose banks, or shores, were bordered with a forest verdure of
trees exceeding in magnitude our previous conceptions. Far off in the
interior, as the sun declined, were seen mountains whose summits were
clothed in fleecy mists while beneath the varied descent appeared
dressed in rainbow tints of moving light and shadow. The banks of the
mighty river, or arm of the ocean, became more distinct in the
approaching twilight, until darkness with its pall withheld them from
view. Again another day dawned; refreshed with the dews of the night we
bethought ourselves how we might bring the vessel to land where we could
obtain water to quench our thirst, when lo, with the first feeble dip of
the oars the trickle of the water inward discovered to a child its
freshness. The faint struggles of the oarsmen strengthened with the fear
of again being carried out into the ocean, for the current was forcing
the vessel backward, were at length rewarded with the stranding of its
keel beneath the steep bank of an inlet.

“‘In vain our eyes, from the mast, searched the shore for evidences of
man’s habitation; neither smoke from hamlets or signs of cultivation
could be traced. Weary and weak, but composed in spirit, from our now
secure attachment to land, which, although foreign, seemed afar off
fruitful, all sank into a deep and refreshing slumber, lulled by the
familiar sound of the cicada’s shrill vibrations, which continued
unbroken until the dawn of another day, when we were awakened by the
sound of strange voices speaking an unknown tongue. Surprised, but not
alarmed, when we discovered that the utterances were from a collection
of human beings who were viewing us and our vessel from the bank that
overlooked the transtra, our own curiosity was in like manner attracted
by the novelty of their appearance. In stature they exceeded in height
our own, but were gracefully formed, with expressive features inclined
in color to a brownish red. With eyes of vivid blackness they seemed
capable of giving intensity to the two extremes of passion—expressed by
revengeful anger and dalliant softness. The covering of their bodies was
so slight that it failed to afford the shadow of concealment or
restraint to their persons.

“‘While we were sleeping they had drawn our vessel into the inlet so far
that with slight assistance we could raise ourselves to a footing upon
the bank, this with signs they proffered and we accepted. When seated
upon the grassy plain, the women with native grace prepared in shell a
thick paste compounded of milk and fruits, exceedingly palatable and
refreshing. For a drink they pierced the eyes of large nuts from which
flowed a milky fluid that found special favor with our women and
children. These tokens of kindly regard were presented with timid
gentleness and solicitude that won our confidence.

“‘When our appetites were appeased in their craving for the _novus res_
in freedom from the ocean’s savor of salt, signs of mutual curiosity
began to flow in pantomimic gesture. First, they questioned from whence
we came? We answered by pointing over the ocean. But when they pointed
to the sky in its descent to the horizon, we saw that they would ask
whether we were descended from the gods. Humoring their implied belief,
we answered truly by uprooting a stalk of grass, then holding its seed
filled follicles dependent we in addressing the roots to heaven shook
the semina from their receptacles to the earth, therewith, to their
apprehension, acknowledging our heavenly origin.

“‘Communing among themselves, with a deferential review of our persons
they seemingly acknowledged the superiority of our pretensions, while
questioning the cause of our forlorn condition when found. At length in
their doubt they appealed to an aged man whose appearance augured
wisdom, who answered sagely by addressing, for our comprehension and
approval, his symbolic exposition of the cause. Selecting two tall
spears of grass, overtopping the heads of their kind, he pointed to the
eldest parents of our group, then reversing the stalks with the roots
upward, he forced the symbols apart by introducing a younger female
blade between, adherent to the tendrils of the paternal branch, causing
the mother and her seed to fall to the earth. This disruptive
demonstration so clearly defined his knowledge of the human passions, in
accordance with the experienced injustice of our own race, that a blush
of shame suffused, with its evidence of conviction, the faces of some of
our elders whose withers of frailty had been touched. Taking these
symptoms of assent as evidences of conviction, the oracle, with a self-
complacent air, relapsed into silence, his kindred mingling their
admiration for his ability in prescientia with reverence for our
supposed paternity. Having arrived at the Ultima Thule of their
curiosity we endeavored to satisfy ours without lessening the kindly
reverence we inspired from our presumed descent from the gods. But
learned nothing beyond the impression that the land extended, in the
three opposed directions to the ocean, to the horizon, and that their
country was the full of a moon nearer the setting sun, to which they
invited us warmly to accompany them.

“‘Although still fancying that we were in a remote division of our own
land, yet hopeless of regaining our homes, or intelligence of our
people, we concluded to avail ourselves of their invitation, for an
attempt to return by the ocean augured sure destruction. Nourished with
fruits and wild game, which nature furnished and sustained without the
aid of human labor, and nursed with the tenderest care we soon regained
our strength. Signifying our readiness to accompany them, and desire to
take with us our household lares, utensils, harvest, and fruit seeds,
they brought, after the lapse of days, diminutive beasts of burden,
which seemed united in equal relationship to the camel and goat. When
the day of departure came, we bid tearful farewell to our vessel, then
with the ready aid of our benefactors buried it from vision that it
might escape desecration from wandering tribes.

“‘Many days were occupied in our inland journey before we reached the
valley of our destination. When at length, after surmounting many
difficulties, it opened to our view we were overjoyed with its beauty
and the bounteous prospect it afforded for the fruitful recompense of
our mischance in original intention. In the sincerity of our joy we
could not withhold our thanksgiving for the divine direction that had
conducted us through so many perils to a land, where, as demi-gods, we
could live in freedom from the dread of invasion and corrupt oppression
of imposed tyrants. Our advent brought peace to our benefactors, who had
been forced into wandering exile by the neighboring tribes; who instead
of opposing their return solicited the privilege of bestowing their
labor as a willing sacrifice in atonement for their injustice in
expelling the Betongo tribes from their lands while under the favor of
the ruling spirit.

“‘Season after season followed the advent and propagation of our Latin
generations in the Betongo valleys, each more bountiful than its
predecessor, until years were multiplied into centuries. The
reproduction of the exotic grains, fruits, and vegetables yielded
tenfold returns in excess of their rates from native soil; and while our
people preserved their original prestige as a race of superior beings,
dealing with arbitrary justice free from forced oppression, they
prospered and were reverenced by the aboriginals for the happiness they
conferred by kindly example. During the first century, the castaways and
their descendants did not disdain to give instruction to the natives
with the exampled labor of their own hands; and through the adoption of
their children in allied direction with those of the Latin race, easy
communication in language was held.’”

Correliana here remarked, that in the first part she had adhered closely
to the rendering of her Latin ancestor, Marcus Adinope, the Prætor of
the castaways in their first settlement of the Betongo valleys. “I will
now,” she said, “append his apology for practicing duplicity in
accepting the homage of the aboriginals as their due in the assumed
character of demi-gods.

“‘In the first instance, we felt constrained to accept their proffered
reverence paid in fealty to our supposed descent from the gods, not from
the feeling that the assumption would offer us the means of practicing
arbitrary oppression in safety; but as a necessary composition for an
exampled restraint of gentleness in association among ourselves, as a
secure hostage for imparting its godlike virtues to our trusting
neophytic benefactors. Aided with the harmless reverential impression,
we were able the better to control the plebiscite democracy incorporated
with our element of self command over the thoughtless impulses of the
subservient oarsmen and hinds of our vessel. Our memories were kept on
the alert with the monitorial revival of insurrections and massacres,
which had their origin from impositions exacted in the conquered Roman
provinces by plebeian officials who had paid a price for their
promotion. Indeed, the cause of our transmigration had had its birth
from that illegitimate source of instability.’

“After the passage of many centuries, another of our family has recorded
the result of the democratic majority’s usurpation of the power of
equalizing self-command, evidently in re-admonition of his predecessor’s
apology:—

“‘How void of self enduring forethought are the uncontrolled instincts
of youth, when reckless of experienced premonitions! It is with painful
emotions that I am obliged to record that the descendants of the
aboriginals who succored our forefathers in their castaway distress, and
preferred them to their own hereditaments, with the reverent homage
accorded to the gods, are now subject to the cruel exactions of the
taskmaster. The hardships to which they are now subjected by the
multiplied progeny of the sailor,—who in thoughtless frenzy attributed
their thirst upon the ocean to exact equalization in water
distribution,—will prove the sure precursor of our common destruction.
The frailty of our godhead assumption has been long since exposed,
engendering hatred from the enslaved in abhorrence of their own
submissive weakness, so that with the opportunity they will destroy
every vestige of their humiliation.’

“This prophecy indicates the period when the defense of a walled city
was required for sustaining the exactions of the taskmaster. The
traditionary scenes enacted by the old Heracleans, as the inhabitants of
the first city were styled, would be as painfully oppressive to your
kind-hearted generosity as they would be to me as relator. It will be
sufficient for me to state, that the ‘City of the Falls’ was built by
Indian labor, enforced by the cruelty of the taskmaster, as a place of
recreative resort during the heated solstice, for the old Heracleans.
When remonstrance failed to abate the oppressive exactions enforced from
the accumulating slaves, and stay the wild orgies enacted by the
democratic rule of the city’s majority, the kind-hearted stipulated for
the cession of the new city for their seceding occupation, subject to
their own governmental rule. In less than a decade of years, after the
separation, the inhabitants of the old city were surprised, during the
celebration of nocturnal orgies, dedicated to mythical patronage, by the
uprising of their slaves; and with the exception of a few, who had been
forewarned, an hour previous, in time to make good their escape to the
City of the Falls, all were massacred, and the old city has continued a
tenantless ruin to the present day.

“Unsatisfied with the partial success of their vengeful retribution, the
Indians entailed upon their successors the unlimited enforcement of a
constant siege, until the inhabitants of the new city were exterminated,
a result that without your effective interposition in our behalf would
be well nigh accomplished.”




                             CHAPTER VIII.


Long before daylight on the morning succeeding the narration of
Correliana Adinope, the busy sound of preparation was heard on board of
the _Tortuga_, and on shore. Food and clothes for raiment were bestowed
in hampers and bales, by the Kyronese, in quantity sufficient for the
easy carriage of the mules; while Captain Dow and his subalterns, Jack
and Bill, marshaled the Kyronese guard in preparation for rifle, pistol,
and howitzer, defensive and offensive practice. At sunrise, when nearly
ready for the start, Correliana clapped her hands with a joyful
exclamation, and, in a moment after a messenger falcon stooped in perch
upon her wrist. This was of the species _Falco peregrinus_ of the
pampas, but much improved in size and plumage from culture. Its
greeting, as with the first, was replete with pleasurable animation,
extending its wings in impulsive sway to the voluntary and involuntary
action of its talons, peculiar to birds and beasts of prey, when subject
to intensified sensual gratification. As with the cat kind, who make
their “friendly” satisfaction manifest by extending and contracting the
sheath muscles of the claws, the falcon unconsciously closed its talons
upon the wrist of its mistress, causing her to utter, with the painful
punctures, “Soh, soh, Merlin, mon brachiale!” Captain Greenwood,
observing the flow of blood from her wrist, quickly supplied her with a
pair of gauntlets. Merlin, when again restored to her wrist, seemed to
understand the intention of the buckskin proviso, for he used his talons
in the expressive ruffling and extending of his wings; succeeding with
his coquetry in attracting her attention from the train of meditation in
which she appeared to be engaged, he raised his wings upright, exposing
beneath parchment scripts; these removed he leisurely commenced a survey
of his surroundings. After their perusal she wrote a few words in reply
upon some French tissue paper furnished by M. Hollydorf; this secured in
Merlin’s sacks, he desired Captain Dow to take note of the bird’s
course, before it rose to its poise, as it would guide him to the
opening of the pass in the foot-hills. After the bird in floating flight
had reached the point of designation, it soared to its poise and in
descent quickly disappeared from view.

When the train was fully in motion, Correliana beckoned Captain
Greenwood apart, and then to his surprise addressed him in English, with
slow, measured enunciation the involumed supplication “Will-you-come-to-
us-if-we-are-successful? We-are-happy-among-ourselves,-and-if-you-love-
happiness-as-we-enjoy-it-in-our-simplicity,-and-your-educated-habits-
will-permit-you-to-love-me,-without-regret-from-other-cause-than-my-own-
demerits,-there-will-be-great-joy-in-store-for-us.”

The captain’s faculties, notwithstanding his bewildered amazement caused
by her sudden acquisition of power to express her thoughts in English,
and with such clearness his most coveted desire, in terms so agreeable
to his perception of her worth, answered with prompt energy, in quick
imitation of her method, “If-my-life-is-spared-I-will-visit-you-soon!”

After a moment’s hesitation, as if to realize the full comprehension of
his reply, she, with a sudden flush of joyful animation, exclaimed, “I-
am-certain-you-feel-that-my-happiness-depends-upon-the-consummation-of-
our-love-in-Heraclea!” Then with the proffer of salutation, she answered
to the hastening call of Captain Dow.

This parting scene between Captain Greenwood and Correliana caused M.
Hollydorf’s countenance to become overcast with a rueful shadow of
dismay. At nine o’clock the train reached the foot-hills where they
exchanged their last farewell signals with those left under Tortugan
protection. On the fifth day after their departure from the anchorage of
the _Tortuga_, the train had gained the eastern slope of the highest
mountain pass that opened to their view the Betongo valleys, with but
one interruption to their progress from Indian opposition, which was
quickly turned aside.

On the first of July, while in midway descent to the valley, the falcons
returned after a short flight over a wooded district to the left of
their course, which was interpreted by Correliana as an indication of
danger from an approaching party of Indians. This startling news caused
the greatest activity. While Captain Dow reconnoitred with his glass the
descent for a point of advantage for their reception, his two cannoniers
prepared the howitzer charges for immediate action. Fortunately they
were able to reach a comparatively level plat that offered for their
train’s protection the vantage of a natural rampart, which was improved
for the reception of the gun with a wall of stones serving as a mask.
When the defensive preparations were completed, the pack train, under
its guard of women, was sheltered behind it as far in the rear as
possible.

While yet engaged in strengthening our position for their reception, a
large body of Indians on horseback debouched from a wooden pass upon the
plateau below. It was evident from their movements, when collected for
consultation, that they were aware of our near approach, and when
discovered would be set upon immediately. That the crisis might be
hastened, and the obstruction to our progress removed as speedily as
possible, the weakness of our party in numbers was exposed outside of
the temporary walls of the fortification as a temptation for speedy
onset. Their eyes were soon directed toward us, at first with silent
curiosity, then after a short consultation they sprang upright upon the
croups of their horses, and commenced brandishing their spears and
clubs, with the evident intention of intimidation. Accessions to their
number were constantly appearing from different quarters showing that
our progress had been watched. Nearly an hour elapsed before a forward
movement was attempted. Their waiting delay enabled us to strengthen our
position. They commenced their approach with feats of equitation that
would have delighted a circus audience, seemingly determined to
entertain us to the death. Indeed, their evolutions, which were timed to
a war song and dance with a display of acrobatic agility as they
advanced at a gallop, attracted our admiration. When within six or seven
hundred yards they came to a sudden halt, then after a short “palaver”
they reformed in sections, which commenced an involved circle dance, the
horses performing their parts without prompting from bridle or lash. The
object of the entertainment was soon apparent in the narrowing space
between the outer circle and our rubble stone wall. Jack, although
amused with the nearing foes’ tactics, nursed the fuse fire of his
linstock with watchful care, Bill keeping the howitzer in range with
their rising advance to the point intended for the discharge of their
spears. While yet without the bounds of their spears’ range, quick as
thought the whole band were in full career toward our cover, the
foremost launching their spears at everything human exposed. The ducking
and dodging on our side was naturally and skillfully executed, but not
in every instance gracefully. Jack reached the ground in the style of
turtles sunning themselves on a water log, when surprised by urchins
with a flight of stones, but in his descent did not lose his presence of
mind, for the report of the howitzer was simultaneous with the report of
the rifles. The massing of the horses in the onset caused a fearful
havoc. The effect produced upon the survivors, from the turmoil of
bewilderment, subjected them to a second and third discharge of the
cannon and rifles; then in view of the slaughter the mayorong’s pity was
excited, and with imploring signs he petitioned Captain Dow to withhold
the fire of his men. The cessation allowed the Indians to recover from
their daze, but panic succeeding, they dispersed wildly in flight,
giving expression to the tumultuous effect of fear in attitudinal
variations, which, in equestrian display, exceeded in diversity those
improvised as a prelude to the battle.

When the last of the fugitives had disappeared, it was discovered that
Correliana had sustained the only injury inflicted from the cast of
spears. Fearing that her protectors, in amused scorn for the unwarlike
antics of the foe, would allow them to attain their intention of
securing, with the impetus of onset, an effective range for their
weapons, she had risen to caution Captain Dow, when in the act a spear
grazed her shoulder inflicting a flesh wound. This had been immediately
cared for by the Kyronese women, and her anxiety and pain were so slight
that she rallied the two sailors, who were sincerely affected with
sympathy for her safety, on the speedy methods they adopted in avoidance
of the spears.

Jack with a humorous smile, rendered comical by the perceptible movement
of his tongue, as if in the act of revolving a quid from side to side of
his mouth, replied: “To be sure it was sum’ut lubberish to your
ledyship’s eyes, but it’s a way we learned at sea to draw the enemy’s
fire.”

The effect of our arms had been terrible, the dead and wounded Indians
greatly outnumbering the shots fired; the predominance of the latter
bespoke in plain terms either the unpracticed skill of the Kyronese in
the use of firearms, or their more probable instinctive humanity.
Captain Dow, anxious to retrieve lost time, had the wounded and dead
bodies of the Indians removed for the passage of the train. The mayorong
caused the former to be tenderly carried into the inclosure, and when
the train had passed beyond the human obstructions, he requested
permission to remain with the elder matrons that they might bestow some
relief upon the suffering until their companions recovered from their
panic, promising to overtake them before they encamped for the night.
Although the objects of his delay received but little sympathy from the
members of the corps, and its male adjuncts, they could not refuse the
request, but insisted that he should retain a sufficient number of his
men as a guard for their safety. When the moon rose we had gained the
valley of the Betongo, and the rare beauty of the scenery, under its
resplendent light, invited us onward; but the mayorong’s party had not
overtaken us, which caused some anxiety, but this was soon dissipated by
their appearance. Urged on by the delightful prospect, heralding the
speedy attainment of our journey’s object, we were enabled to encamp in
a shaded nook upon the banks of the Betongo river. Notwithstanding the
lateness of the hour, the Kyronese added game and fresh fish to our
delayed repast.

With the morning’s dawn we moved onward over a paved causeway, with its
massive stones still intact after untold centuries of wear from Time’s
detrite usage. Inland from this shaded causeway, we passed Indian
villages at intervals of a few miles, pleasantly located upon knolls
surrounded with banana, corn, and vegetable plantations. One of the
largest we entered, but found it deserted; there were, however, abundant
evidences of its recent occupation. Finding an abundant supply of
roasted corn, dried fish, and other edibles, an equal quantity was taken
from each house, the hampers of the mules furnishing cloths in exchange.
The site of each village was connected by a branch causeway with that of
the river’s bank, confirming the relation of Correliana.

To kill, rout, and destroy, is the orthodox inculcation of civilized
progression; so in view of relieving the inhabitants of the besieged
city from the besiegers’ stores of provision, we resolved to visit all
the villages in our route, and mulct from their abundance as much food
as we could transport with our limited means of carriage, leaving with
each an equivalent. Dr. Baāhar advocated the total destruction not only
of the provision left, but of the plantations and villages, in
opposition to the mayorong’s pleading expostulations for their
preservation. But the doctor urged the curative plan of extirpation of
the sources of vitality, as the only authorized means sustained by
classical experience for rendering the enemy’s efforts nugatory. “For,”
said he, “it will be neither consistent or prudent to leave your enemies
the means of prosecuting their unrelenting siege of Heraclea.” The
mayorong, with sad deprecation, pleaded that acts of revengeful
destruction would only enrage, and in naught avail the beleaguered; as
they would increase the inveteracy of hatred, with justice, against the
white race, that so not only the lives and peaceful happiness of the
Heracleans would be sacrificed, but others with like kindly intentions.
For in making others suffer needlessly, we cannot hope through futile
intimidation to be spared ourselves, if an opportunity for revengeful
reprisal should occur? This half soliloquized questioning appeal of the
mayorong, seemed to be addressed to all, and from the impression
conveyed by his intonations in speaking, its truthfulness, when
interpreted, was sanctioned with general approval. Still, although
manifestly grateful for the appreciation of the majority, his
countenance lacked the fullness of satisfaction that the hearty
concurrence of Dr. Baāhar would have afforded. But the doctor, with the
proverbial fatuity of the precedentalist, substituted for the required
solace the revised saw, “they thought themselves wiser in their
generation than their forefathers,” evidently with the intention of
reproving his associates for their defection from the transmitted creed
of warful usage. That there might be no lack in the practical support of
the mayorong’s behest, Correliana left as equivalents, in exchange for
food, a large proportion of the cherished gifts bestowed by Captain
Greenwood.

Determined to reach the besieged city before midday on the morrow, we
did not halt until the dividing range of hills, that separated the upper
and lower valleys of old Heraclea, had been surmounted. Upon the shaded
summit overlooking the vegas we encamped for the night. The cool
refreshing breeze that swept over the hill, and an abundant supply of
sweet grass for recruiting the strength of the horses and mules, lured
us to delay our start on the following morning, until the sun had
dispersed the mists from the valleys. When the fleecy veil was at length
dissipated, an enchanting view was presented upon either hand extending
as far as the eye could reach. Paved roads or causeways followed the
windings of the river and canals through all the alluvial districts.
These were of easy detection from the checkered overgrowth of brambled
weeds, which ever delight to erect their prickly domes and spires above
the ruins of palaces, churches, monumental tombs, and the most splendid
mechanical achievements of man, as if in derision of his instinctive
claims to immortality, after a life spent in arrogant oppressions, and
thorny assumptions, opposed to the kindred sympathy of reciprocal
goodness. While the Kyronese were bestowing their kindly attention upon
the animals, M. Hollydorf, with barometrical aid, calculated the
altitude of the valley above the plain of the Tortuga, and found that
its elevation exceeded four thousand and nine hundred feet. But with
heat lessened by only a few degrees from the tropical zenith, the
valley, from its still continued facilities for irrigation, appeared to
be the scene of perpetual verdure. Its altitude gave a climate, from
mountain inclosure, especially adapted for the cultivation of exotic
fruits and cereals, of which, in wild growth, there were abundant
specimens.

While Correliana was in thoughtful meditation, overlooking the beautiful
scene, her attention was attracted to the labors of Mr. Welson, who was
engaged in writing out his diuretic observations upon the developed
phases of instinct. With Dr. Baāhar’s aid, he, at her request, imparted
in outline the result of his labors, which he styled, “A Relative
Exposition of Instinctive Traits Common to Animal Life.” Under this head
he had classified those common to savage and civilized humanity, in the
following order. Poison, Material and Immaterial. The lowest grades of
savage life use material poison almost exclusively, as a destructive
agent in their intercourse with each other. Representatives of civilized
nations compound with speech vituperative venom, which is as deadly in
its effect upon happiness, as material poison upon the body. Its
insinuating use, in language, is a speciality of women who have suffered
in reputation from its taint, and in turn, to conceal their own
frailties, use it as an imperative means of counter irritation to blind
the censure of their kind. Illustrative examples of savage and civilized
superstition, compared by an experiment upon savage and civilized
representatives of the human family. Both submissive to instinctive
fear. The savage is dubbed a knight with the collar and conferred order
of Bath. His departure, after the ceremony of consecration, in pursuit
of adventures. Reptile duel between a Boisdean serpent and an Alligator.
Instinctive tactics of displayed strategy. Guacho “sympathy” enlisted
for the weaker party. Reverse. Result of civilized arbitration.
Correliana readily interpreted the satirical import of Mr. Welson’s
comprehensive method of illustration; but questioned if the women of
civilized society had ever in fact given truthful cause for the
expressed venom of his satire. In answer, he referred her to M.
Hollydorf, as a more ready exponent, who would truthfully inform her
whether he had by insinuation libeled the market value of female
“virtue” as a negotiable article of appraisement in the gossiping marts
of fashionable society? Still puzzled, in the absence of the referee,
she applied to Dr. Baāhar for a direct elucidation of the word “virtue,”
which she had so often heard him make use of in conversation. The doctor
in explanation said, that in the highest caste relations of female
association, termed fashionable society, the word virtue was used as a
compendious cloak for the concealment of instinctive gratification,
which remained unblemished in its sanctity of expression, while it
remained impenetrable to the searching eye of scandal.

At this stage of her sophistic bewilderment, the mayorong directed their
attention to the nearest village. The Indian women having discovered
their encampment, were waving their trophies, obtained from involuntary
exchange, with jubilant manifestations of happy elation. At this
exhibition, after a suitable recognition had been made by Jack and Bill,
who waved aloft, from their gun carriage, bunches of bananas, all turned
with thankful expression to the mayorong, who had so earnestly advocated
the conciliatory means adopted, so that he was fain to have recourse to
his animal charges to conceal his emotions. Dr. Baāhar, however, could
not withhold a disdainful expression of chagrin, that the chief of a
wandering tribe, without a pedigree, or a home, should presume to plume
himself upon his approved controversion of national usage that had been
revered from time immemorial as the sanctified source of wisdom.

Correliana turning to the two sailors, whose countenances were moved
with joyful emotions from the Indian women’s grateful demonstrations of
pleasure, asked how it happened that they were able to retain their
destructive presence of mind when forced to evade the Indians’ spears by
a disordered movement? Her slow enunciation of English gave Jack time to
work up his “reckoning” for an answer, which he gave with the blush of
shamefacedness peculiar to the British sailor when accosted by a “lady,”
deepened by the reminder, that to his sensitiveness implied the “white
feather.” “You see, your ladyship, those Indian chaps had been cutting
up their antics so long, we sort o’ lost our lay, but they brought us
too with their spears, so we returned the compliments of the season in
our fashion. Th’of as Bill says, we’d much rather had the dig of the
spear than it should have touched you by our ducking.”

This new source of sensitiveness they had conjured through self-reproof,
from the impression that their bodies might have averted the course of
the spear. But when assured that she was out of their range when she
received the wound, they were greatly comforted. Jack expressing his
relief in the phrase, “things being as they were, it couldn’t be
helped!”

As we proceeded on our way, along the eastern margin of the broad
southeastern valley, our progress was overlooked by the women and
children of the villages, who waved as we passed, our “forage” exchanges
of yesterday, with an evident civilized interpretation of gratitude
expressed in favor of their neighbors. But our supply of provisions
being accommodated to our means of transportation, we could not gratify
the desire that prompted the acceptance of their overtures. Evidently
interpreting the cause, we found upon rounding a hill in advance a herd
of cows panniered with bunches of bananas, plantains, and other edibles
waiting for our acceptance, the donors watching us from the leafy
screens of the hill plantations. The contraband gift—for their male
protectors were evidently absent—was too acceptable, for the prospective
relief of want, to be refused, and the recompense was suited to the full
gratification of the womanly promptings suggesting bestowal.

In descending from a hill in advance, the valley proper of old Heraclea
opened to our view. The plain, under the golden light of the morning
sun, exceeded in beauty of variegation as in extent the famed vega of
Granada, when clothed in the productive vestments of Moorish culture. At
nine o’clock we passed the field fortalice commanding a view of the
valley, and through the river gate those below. It had evidently been
designed for a signal station and barracks for those employed to guard
the ripening crops; the necessity for its erection bespeaking the
inaugurated reign of oppression. The rock used in its construction, as
well as of the bridges, dykes, and bank supports of the canals, was
basaltic. Unlike granite, marble, and other stones used for building, it
had withstood the disintegration of friction and chemical action through
the lapse of ages with scarcely perceptible change. The style of
architecture bore a strong resemblance to that inaugurated by Cestius,
and introduced some sixty years before the Christian era. Our way from
the tower to the hill city of old Heraclea, was a paved roadway
overshadowed with relict growths of trees, whose ancestry had probably
“ennobled” it with shade as an avenue of recreation for the citizens.
Reaching the headland of the city esplanade, its level was gained by a
zigzag ascent of the same breadth with its connecting avenue, its
gradations being easy and of curious construction. Gaining the esplanade
we were surprised to find its dimensions so extensive, as from below we
scarcely conceived its plain would exceed an acre in area, whereas in
reality it afforded a promenade that appeared to approach in length and
breadth a half of a mile. As in the avenue below, the remains of parapet
seats, and protected spaces for trees, were everywhere apparent.
Entering from the esplanade, which extended in narrowed proportion to
the gateway, through the single broad street of the first walled
inclosure built for its protection, we passed to the fora, around which
were the houses of those preferred to its distinctive advantages from
the ruling qualifications reverenced, as godlike, from the fluent flow
of speech. Built in an amphitheatre its walled defense could be made
certain against the united tribes of the aboriginal race without, while
the system of construction combined economy in space and in labor,
giving evidence of emergency from doubtful crisis. The first inclosure
had probably furnished ample space for the accommodation of its
founders. Passing from the nucleus by the nether street of the fora, we
entered the second surrounding, which corresponded in breadth with the
original. The third and last, bespoke the disruptive reign of sensual
gratification, heralding dissolution. Its expanded breadth from wall of
circumvallation to nucleus, must have exceeded the distance of a mile,
the palaces being detached from it by gardens and outhouses, the latter
subserving the purpose devised from original intention. The structures
retained, almost unimpaired, their original perfection; while within
many of the heavier household utensils were found in place, touched
lightly, from the comparative dryness of the climate, by an age of
centuries’ duration. These indications proclaiming the sudden calamity
of successful insurrection, and extermination, were to be seen in every
direction.

Leaving this city solitude, once peopled by the instinctively
thoughtless and “gay,” we gained the summit of the dividing ridge
separating the Betongo from the Vermejo valley. A glance sufficed in
answer for the question of causes that led to the selection of the “New
City’s” site as a safe place for recreative resort. Limited in extent,
and remote from the larger cultivated district, it could not be made
available as a permanent place of residence for the guard of growing
crops; but was naturally adapted for the indulgence of luxurious ease in
a revoltful country, as its walls inclosed sufficient arable land for
the support of a limited number of inhabitants, while its natural and
artificial aids for defense rendered it impregnable against aboriginal
weapons, without taxing the energies of the citizens. Our introductory
glances of admiration were arrested by tokens of recognition which
greeted us from the citizens, who had assembled along the guard walk of
the southern parapet in waiting expectation of our appearance. Their
signals soon informed us of the enemy’s position, which was in a grove
surrounding a temple, and reaching from it to the road of descent at its
escarped junction with the level avenue leading to the city gate.

In consultation for the devisement of means for dislodging them, Dr.
Baāhar, and the curators of sound, still urged the precedent of
classical experience, which advocated the greatest possible destruction
of life when engaged in war with barbarous nations and tribes.
Notwithstanding the pleading appeal inspired by the sight of her
distressed relatives, Correliana manifested strong emotions of
repugnance against the wanton destruction of life, even when the
advocates strengthened their advice by quoting the padre’s experience on
board of the _Tortuga_. Turning to Mr. Welson and the mayorong for their
support, she was relieved by the former’s humorous expression, as he
asked Dr. Baāhar to enumerate the number of generations that had passed,
since his ancestors could urge equally well merited judgment for their
own destruction? Then turning to Mr. Dow he asked whether he would
prefer to seal the fruition of his hopes with slaughter, or the more
lasting effect that would be insured by arousing their superstitious
fears. Although urgently impatient of any delay to the full realization
of his historical source of fame, his respect for the pungent elements
of his questioner’s resources caused him to offer his willing
acquiescence if an effectual plan could be suggested for insuring their
dispersion. Correliana asked the sailors through Mr. Welson if they
could not think of some way to frighten the Indians without injury, as
she could not bear the thought of exposing to death and mutilation the
husbands, fathers and brothers of the women who had bestowed so
gratefully of their means for the relief of those who were descended
from their oppressors. After the two sailors had “put their heads
together to overhaul their lockers,” Jack said, if he knew exactly where
the enemy lay, he could in a giffin fix a shell so that it would scream
like a broadside of devils before it burst; and th’of they were
civilized, and not up to the thing, they would scud like swallows caught
in a gale at sea. The sailors’ invention was adopted, and when
everything was in readiness for all the emergencies that could be
anticipated, the descent was commenced; but notwithstanding the eminency
of danger, admiration gained the sway, attracted by the natural beauties
developed at every turn in our downward course. The skill displayed for
the artificial improvement of the natural advantages, would also have
received like commendation if the means employed had not excited
emotions of abhorrence. For the Indians who accomplished these labors of
Heraclean devisement were in fact the benefactors of their oppressors.

Having arrived at the desired position for the essay of Jack’s “devilish
experiment” the shell was belched forth from the howitzer upon its
frightful mission. Its screaming powers had not been overrated by the
projectors, but it exploded before it had accomplished half of its
intended distance, seemingly in the very midst of the concealed foe, for
the grove became swayingly alive from the panic imparted to its wooded
growths. Moving rapidly forward, a second shell, true to its intention,
accelerated the flight into a rout as wild with dismay as was ever
enacted by congeneric warriors with civilized instincts.

Advancing to the bridge spanning the river moats to either bank of their
conjoined stream, the city gates were open and the parents of Correliana
stood upon the threshold waiting to bestow with tearful gratitude their
acknowledgments for opportune deliverance from the manifold perils to
which they had been subject. After they had bestowed upon their daughter
tokens of affectionate welcome, in which all present joined with kindred
sympathy, we were ushered in and made the centre of grateful attraction.
It soon became painfully apparent from their wan features and tottering
steps, that their vital energies were reduced to the lowest ebb from
over anxiety and the want of suitable nourishment; so we at once
mustered our prepared resources, and became their directing
entertainers. Even the saturnine dignity of Mr. Dow, and the patronizing
sagery of Dr. Baāhar, relaxed under the beneficent influence imparted
from their ministering attentions. When the prætor and tribunes
requested an introduction to the patriarch of the Kyronese, his absence
was first noticed by the members of the corps, Correliana, and his
granddaughters; when in the act of apologizing for his absence and the
elder matrons, they were seen issuing from the temple grove; with their
welcome the gates were closed and the sailors placed in charge. Then the
Heracleans were placed upon the sillias of the horses and
mules,—notwithstanding their earnest protests of ability to walk,—while
each, as they proceeded up the avenue of the latifundium, was attended
with the sympathetic support of the Kyronese and members of the corps.
At the oppidum vera gates, nearly a mile distant from the cinctus, or
outer wall gates, the Heracleans insisted upon dismounting, thankfully
accepting the Kyronese proffers of assistance in rendering service to
the sick. Correliana then directed us to the quarters prepared for our
use, expressing the hope that the condition of her people would afford
ample explanation for whatever was found lacking or amiss for the
assurance of comfort in their accommodations? Having unpacked and
disposed of our instruments and personalities in the house prepared for
us, an evening consultation was held to devise means for the purveyance
of supplies for the nearly famished inhabitants. Feeling certain that
the besiegers were effectually dispersed, the hunting of wild game was
proposed as a dernier for present support.




                              CHAPTER IX.


At daybreak, of the morning following our entry into Heraclea, the
prætor and Correliana paid us a visit. After salutations of renewed
welcome the prætor addressed us, in substance, as follows:—

“You are already partially aware of the means of communication which
have been employed to advise us of your presence, and the deliverance of
our daughters’ rescuers from their extreme peril! Through the same
source we have been advised of your daily progress for our relief, now
happily consummated. When the health of our families shall have ceased
to tax your anxious care, we will then endeavor to make you sensible of
our gratitude through the warmth of affectionate reciprocation. For the
present we will ask you to assume the responsibility of your own
entertainment, for we are utterly powerless for the fulfillment of that
duty so inseparably imposed by our obligations. But with our energies
restored we shall claim the gratification of reassuming the privileges
of our natural charge. Until this sum total of our past indebtedness
shall have been fulfilled, please accept the keys of our city in token
of our submission to your direction?”

In reply to this tender, M. Hollydorf said, “We will accept the keys,
but only in the light of a necessary facility to render our sympathetic
aid more readily effectual, and will certainly feel more sincere
gratification when your own, and the health of your associate citizens,
will admit of their restoration. Until then we shall rely upon your
advice for direction, for we have already learned to prize its
transmitted agency beyond measure, as it exceeds the power of material
recompense.” Then taking the prætor’s hands, he continued with glowing
warmth and tearful emotions: “Indeed we feel assured, beyond the
possibility of selfish reflection, that in preserving your people, we
have acted as agents for the opening of a way through which the children
of our race may exalt themselves above the gregarious instincts of
animality. We have already realized premonitory emotions, which bespeak
an assured glimpse of immortality, albeit our habits and customs intrude
their practiced grossness to mar the beatific visions inspired from the
influence of your exampled reflection.”

Here the tremulous cadences of a pæan hymn caused the prætor to beckon
us beyond the threshold, and from thence we saw gathered in groups,
before the portals of each door, the residents uniting in the choral
anthem of thanksgiving to the Creator for blessings vouchsafed with
deliverance. At its close, we were apprised that it was their morning
and evening custom to offer grateful salutations of praise with the
rising and declining sun. Then, in the fullness of their grateful joy,
they left to engage in the nursing avocations of the day.

After their departure we engaged in preparation for our first hunting
expedition; when nearly ready the mayorong appeared accompanied by three
Indians whose bearing proclaimed them upland chiefs. With their
introduction, he stated that they had visited him while he was attending
the wounded of their tribe in the temple of the grove; and as they
evinced kindly emotions while endeavoring to make him understand the
chief object of their visit, he followed them to the margin of the
wooded growth, and he there beheld a train of horses loaded with
panniers containing a plentiful supply of grain, so much needed by the
famishing Heracleans. “Unable to withhold the elation of joyful surprise
I embraced them, and could not resist the pleasure of bringing them to
receive your personal acknowledgments for their timely supply of food.”
The prætor and tribunes, having been informed of the Betonges chiefs’
introduction into the city by the mayorong, with the supply of food they
had brought as a voluntary peace offering, hastened first to the
hospitium, and then to the quarters of the corps to give them a fitting
reception. To the surprise of all, Correliana, who accompanied her
father, addressed the chiefs in their own language, with expressions of
such grateful warmth that the eyes of the savages became tremulous with
tokens foreshadowing the impressions of a moisture as nourishing to
unselfish sympathy as dew to plants. When these exotic emotions had
subsided, the Indians in turn tersely expressed their regrets for the
unmerited sufferings their tribes had caused from the remote acts
committed by the old Heracleans, who paid the penalty of death for their
oppressions.

Correliana, in explication of what appeared mysterious in her ready use
of the Betongese idiom of the Quichua language, said that she had
learned it from children taken from the Indian villages, and adopted as
hostages to be educated with those of Heraclea. “You have been puzzled,”
she continued, “with many mysterious passages since our first
introduction, which have appeared more unaccountable to reasonable
suggestion than this, still in due time they will be as readily solved.”
After a lengthened conversation with the Indian deputation, Correliana
proposed that the gates of the cinctus wall should thereafter be left
open for the free ingress and egress of their Indian allies, in trustful
confidence as leal as though mutual faith had been kept from the
beginning.

Mr. Welson suggestingly asked, if the river Indians, or in more truthful
expression, the reptile savages, would not avail themselves of this open
invitation to wreak their poisonous vengeance? To which Correliana
smilingly replied: “Our benefactors have informed me that the river
Indians, when in dismayed flight from their repulse, met the old chief
who had been retained as a prisoner on board of the _Tortuga_. Holding
them in check while he described the power you had exercised over him,
and one of your own kind, he urged that any further attempt against the
city would result as in the battle they had just fought. His collar
investment was, in their panic, a sufficient verification of authority,
and although a victim to your sorceries they proclaimed him an
embogator, or prophet itinerator of the tribes. His description of the
effects you produced upon him, conjoined with the padre’s fears, has
established your reputation as a magician capable of filling their
bodies with tormenting scrouls, or demons; this increased their panic,
causing the tribe to disperse in all haste to their swamp feudalities.
We are fully assured from the Betongese recital,—and they are not
altogether free from the fear you have inspired,—that your presence will
prove ample security for their absence from the highland valleys, as
well as a protection to the _Tortuga_ on her downward passage. In pledge
of their fidelity, the Betongese have volunteered an escort for the
Kyronese remaining at the anchorage of the _Tortuga_.”

After the chiefs had partaken of food prepared by the Kyronese matrons,
they were escorted without the cinctus gates, by all within the city
able to walk. When the gate keepers, Jack and Bill, were notified that
from thenceforward the gates were to be left unclosed, they fired a
salvo of a single discharge, then limbering up the howitzer stowed it,
with munitions, in the keep of the gate tower; but asked permission to
retain their quarters, with the more than probable inducement of having
their rations brought and dispensed by two Kyronese maidens, with whom
they had been on “signal” terms from the day of their rescue.

Cleorita, after the Indians’ departure, expressed to Correliana the hope
that her grandfather had not been by her judged over-presuming in caring
for the wounded Indians, or bold in assuming the responsibility of
introducing the Indian chiefs into the city? “For with truth, he
says,”—she urged, “he would not have hazarded the venture, if he had not
felt certain that they were trustworthy. Indeed we have seen many worse
who have been grateful for kindness!”

“Say to your grandfather,” returned Correliana, “that we justly merit
the punishment he has inflicted, and I feel more sincerely indebted to
him for the last service than the first. I will own frankly in self-
reprobation, with the belief that the self-reproof includes all except
your own kindred, that my thoughts were altogether diverted from the
possible sufferings of our wounded foes; and I will not pretend to
assume even the merit of feeling sufficient solicitude to inquire
whether any were injured.”

The mayorong, who, with Mr. Welson, had overheard this plea of his
granddaughter in his behalf, and understood its import, said to
Cleorita, “you have spoken according to my desire, but you must not
forget that the members of the corps were fewer in numbers than
ourselves, and were expected as the sponsors of the expedition to
present themselves for the relief of the famished citizens, so we each
acted the parts of our allotment.”

But Mr. Welson expostulated: “You need not attempt to say anything in
our extenuation, for we turned a deaf ear to the groans of the wounded,
and passed them with as much indifference as we left the severed
serpent. Now that we have seen the effects of your unselfish sympathy,
we cannot withhold from ourselves the fact that you are the real
deliverer of Heraclea. You have merited and will receive the untutored
homage of the Indians.”

“You forget,” replied Cleorita, prompted by her grandfather, “the
eminent services of the most favored of the magicians, who has
controlled the savage ‘instincts’ of the river Indians?” With
Correliana’s asservation, that the Heracleans were so universally
indebted to the united members of the corps, and its adjuncts, the
personal distinction of preference was resolved into the grades of
adaptation for the parts enacted, they separated, with mutual
congratulations, to engage in the allotted avocations of the day.

In view of their peaceful prospects, enhanced with food bestowed by
their late foes, the Heracleans recovered rapidly from the pestilential
flux, so that in a few weeks they were able to enjoy the liberty of the
open country, and enter upon the reënjoyment of the boon of self
dependence. The households enlivened by their reappearance, assumed the
renovated impression of a happy vitality breathing outward for the
kindred invocation of reciprocal goodwill. Correliana, with renewed
vivacity and mysterious facility, had conjured the ability for
conducting her own correspondence with Captain Greenwood in English,
also for ready communication with the members of the corps. Her Kyronese
companions, Cleorita and Oviata, had with her revived a speaking
impression of the language derived from their father.

On the morning of the 7th of October, after the journey had been
prolonged far beyond the time set for its accomplishment, from the
grateful desire of the valley Indians to honor the people of the
mayorong, the Kyronese remainder arrived under the conduct of Abdul, his
grandson, and padre Simon. Their reunion and reception was joyful in the
extreme. The compendic ejaculation of the padre, in sanction of the
corps’ expressions of happy satisfaction, will prove ample for the
exposition of the prevailing impressions of renewed goodwill. “By my
soul’s salvation,” he exclaimed, “I have by the same tokens come to a
belike conclusion! For surely I would have as soon thought to see the
lion and lamb lay down peaceably together, as to have been entertained
as I have been by these same Indians. It was so unnatural, for you know
the delegations from the tribes brought on to Washington are exhibited
as specimens of wild beasts indigenous to the soil? But I can tell you,
I never was treated more kindly in my life, bating I could not speak
their language, nor they mine.”

Mr. Welson inquired, whether in the item schedule of good treatment they
asked him to take something, or smoke a weed? The padre happily averred,
with a blush, that he had neither tasted of spirit or tobacco since his
departure from the _Tortuga_. In testimony of the improvement from his
abstinence all bore witness.

“But,” asked Mr. Welson, “had you no fear of being bitten again?”

The padre smilingly expostulated, “I see that you have not left off all
your bad habits, yet, notwithstanding the good example of the
Heracleans! Why not let bygones be bygones? My own thoughts are a
sufficient torment, without having my friends poke fun at my lameness.”

“It is from no ill intention that we keep the crutch in view, but rather
to prevent the necessity of its future use,” suggested Mr. Welson. The
padre closed the sally port of banter, by quoting the saw, “Sufficient
for the day is the evil thereof.”




                               CHAPTER X.


While the chiefs of the valley tribes of Indians were entertained in the
city, one from the Vermejo petitioned the prætor for permission to
settle with his tribe on the vega of the lake expanse of the Boetis
below the temple grove. This petition awakened a pleasing smile in the
expression of the prætor’s face, who, without consulting his associates,
requested his daughter to proffer his fealty to the united chiefs and
their tribes of the valleys, in behalf of the citizens of Heraclea, with
the hope that they would trustfully extend their permission for the
continued occupation of lands alienated by the cruel oppressions of
their ancestors of old Heraclea. When, with some difficulty, Correliana
was able to make them understand the nature of this request, they
pondered, and looked upon each other in bewildered silence. At length,
one of the oldest Betongese chiefs, “saw the approaching ends of the
long severed thread of unity that had caused the siege of hatred, and
the concession offered by the prætor for uniting it with the durable
bonds of privileged equality.” His explanation was received by his
compadric chiefs with smiling assent, assured that it was for mutual
behoofment. With united sanction, evidences of mutual understanding were
passed in tokens of goodwill, until the rays of the sun, in decline,
were cast aslant from the brink of the precipice of the falls, covering
with its bright canopy the shadows that enveloped the city beneath, then
in strengthened concord the pæan hymn of thanksgiving rose in unison
from every Heraclean threshold, and after it a responsive refrain
repeated in swelling harmony from group to group. Of its import M.
Hollydorf gave the following rendition,—

                   “Neighbors good-night, good-night;
                     A day of right,
                     Without a wrong,
                   Hallows our evening song.”

At an early hour of the day, succeeding the arrival of the Kyronese
detachment, Indian women brought fresh fish and fruits as presents, then
volunteered their service for clearing the houses, colonnades, and
patios of the accumulations consequent upon the sickness of the
Heracleans, and were made happy by the acceptance of their proffered
aid. Gradually the cheerless gloom which had held sway in the
depopulated portions of the city for ages, from the harassed anxiety of
its defenders, passed away under the active hands of the Kyronese and
their Indian aids. Fountains, whose conduits had become choked, were
opened and cleaned, causing the house gardens and latifundium to rejoice
in primal gladness from water distribution above and below the surface
of the ground. The loving sympathy of the Heracleans made manifest in
the tender care bestowed upon the reviving sick, brought forth the
latent gentleness of the corps, which had been suppressed from childhood
by the civilized decrees of fashionable folly and vanity, begot from the
precedental inoculation of habits and customs derived from the heroic
ages of classical brutality. Indeed the members of the corps were so
often moved to express genial emotions with glistening tears commingled
with smiles, they seemed to have developed a new inherent combination as
necessary for the joyful expression of happiness, as sun and showers for
the behests of fruitful vegetation. The padre, in his quaint emphatic
style, expressed the prevailing influence in an evening salutation
addressed to his compadre Dr. Baāhar after even song, in this wise:
“Well I declare, doctor, upon my soul, I have passed such a happy day in
useful labor that it seems as if I had just emerged from a life’s
nightmare of torpid inactivity. Really, upon my hopes of salvation, I
believe that I could live and thrive upon the joys of others, without
material food.”

But the doctor, who was impaling the insect game obtained from his day’s
hunting excursion, replied sneeringly. “So, so, h-m—I see, you are taken
in, with the others, by this humdrum life of these Heracleans, with
their puling, wishee-washy affectations of caring more for others than
they do for themselves. The long and short of the matter is, that you
are all subject to an unnatural influence, and if it is not thrown off
immediately, from whatever source derived, you will shortly forswear
manliness, and your hopes of heaven.”

This baited injunction caused the padre to exclaim, “My goodness
gracious, doctor, you frighten me! I hope you don’t truly think there’s
anything like magic or sorcery used upon us here? To be sure, now that I
remember, I have had strange thoughts, to which I have never been
accustomed to before! But they have been in motive pure, urging the
necessity of controlling the appetites and passions, if we would attain
the abiding confidence of a trustful affection, that outreaches self.
But then, as you know, the devil can preach, and practice too, if it so
minds him, self-condemnation?”

“Certes, the fact is,” replied the doctor, “you are subject to vagaries
when your stomach is empty, and require to feel the force of sound
German philosophy that urges substantial fullness as the source of
generous impressions, eloquence, and heroic deeds, and for exorcism
thorough fumigation with tobacco smoke.”

M. Hollydorf, from the intervention of multiplied causes, had
procrastinated the inauguration of his scientific explorations, until
compelled to enter upon the duties of his commission through fear that
inquiries would be instituted to learn the cause of his long silence.
Fully aware that the manifold attractions of Correliana had served to
abate his professional enthusiasm, and urgency of his desire to fulfill
the trust reposed in his discretion, he resolved to make a test of his
naturalistic occupation for the diversion of his thoughts from an object
of hopeless attainment. Notwithstanding his knowledge that her
affections were irrevocably fixed, he could not withhold the
manifestation of a hopeful desire in her presence, within the limits of
reverential respect. Correliana, on her part, seemed to fully understand
the import of his attentions, but was in no way embarrassed by their
indulgence, which with her frankness appeared inexplicable. When he
expressed his intention of commencing his microscopical field
investigations, she asked the privilege of assisting him when free from
the indispensable duties of the household; promising, if her request was
granted, to be diligent for advancement in scientific knowledge. She was
promptly accepted as a catechumenic aid, notwithstanding the promptings
of his judgment which suggested that with the ever present cause of his
disquietude, his remedy would prove of little avail for relief. But he
determined, with a lover’s infatuation, to converse with her as an
abstract divested of material embodiment.

On the first day of November, while engaged in preparing his instruments
after evening song, M. Hollydorf was surprised with a visit from the
prætor and family. Observing that the unusual hour caused fear that some
mishap had occurred, Correliana hastened to relieve the anticipation of
evil tidings by stating the object of the visit. “My father,” she said,
“has been delegated to proffer you the perpetual hospitality of
Heraclea. Not, however, with the design that you should hold it as an
acknowledgment of service rendered, but rather as the promptings of
affectionate esteem for your companionship. As you are aware, we have no
practical knowledge of the world beyond our city walls, and feel that in
winning from you a reciprocation of our affection, we shall be advised
of a course that will avail us as a protection against the grasping
cupidity you have described as the inherent motive power of
civilization. To be forced to adopt habits of corruption, in defiance of
local option, because your enlightened civilization holds that the power
to enforce their arbitrary despotisms with brute strength, aided by
destructive mechanical adjuncts, is right; would, with the introduction
of ‘luxurious’ poisons which frenzy and degrade the human instincts,
make us regret with anguish our liberation from the deadly intent of our
savage foes. For their speedy poison, with its putrefactive torments,
does not degrade the animus of goodness, but relieves it from material
bondage in purity for immortal association with those who have gone
before. We feel self-conscious that we are in intention pure and free
from cupidity, which assures us that we merit the affectionate interest
that you have bestowed for our liberation and welfare. This much we will
advance for initiation without infringing upon the more matured wisdom
in store for your direction. With the full development of our loving
resources, we feel confident in securing your permanent residence among
us, as advisors, in warding off those who would, for the gratification
of craving instinctive cupidity, sacrifice our well-assured happiness,
from which we realize in life a foretaste of immortality (_smiling_).
Fortunately, the sage suggestion which led Mr. Welson to confer the
honor of knighthood upon the savage for the indomitable bravery of his
instinctive propensity to inflict deadly wounds with his teeth, has
relieved us from anxiety from his kindred; and if we can persuade the
grand master ‘Lobscounster’ to take up his abode in our midst, his
influence may extend to the orders of civilization, for our protection
in the enjoyment of affectionate association. If he will but exert his
power to protect us from the forced invasions of trade, that would palm
upon our weakness noxious devices, which in naught would advantage the
invaders, but make us wretched beyond measure, he will insure our
eternal gratitude.”

Mr. Welson in response said,—The eminent Lobscounster, if insured from
increasing merit a continuance of Heraclean favor, he cannot be forced
from his allegiance, and in earnest of his intention thankfully accepted
the extended privilege of becoming their permanent guest. But would most
devoutly beg to decline acceptance of the cognomic title bestowed upon
him by the savage embogator; as to the English ear it was euphonious
with smack of a descent from an ancient sea cook, and in no way likely
to insure reverence among sea-faring men. Indeed, the individual
referred to would have strongly suspected collusive substitution if the
interpreter had been well versed in the aquatic lore of ocean English.

When the visitors were about leaving, M. Hollydorf announced his
intention of entering upon his microscopical investigations on the
morrow, reminding Correliana of her promise to render him assistance.

“With life and health I shall most assuredly be present,” replied
Correliana, “for I have a woman’s curiosity to test the wonderful
magnifying powers of your instruments, which so far exceed our untutored
conceptions of mechanical refinement. As we have some practical
knowledge derived from the observations of animalculan life, we hope
that our assistance in your department of science may eventuate in
relieving your anxiety, occasioned by the delay incurred from the aid
you have rendered our people.” With this enigmatical proposition,
bespoken with the earnest zest of sincerity peculiar to all her
variations, Correliana and her parents bade the members of the corps
good-night. Long after the departure of their visitors, the members of
the corps, puzzled and perplexed by Correliana’s seemingly frank
intention, commingled with implied reservations, and a knowledge of the
world incompatible with the complete isolation to which their people had
been subjected for ages, endeavored to unravel the clew to her powers of
premonition.

After listening in silence for a long time to the various suggestive
expositions of others, the padre suddenly exclaimed, “You may reason and
think what you please, but for my own part I know that I have not been
myself since _she_ first came on board of the _Tortuga_; and if
everything was fair and above board, as they would have us believe by
their words and actions, they would speak out at once, and not hold
anything back to make us feel doubtful of our souls’ safety. For by the
mouths of a cloud of witnesses, we know that the powers of darkness have
wrought from the beginning of the world their designs for the temptation
of souls, through the agency of woman’s allurements; and for myself I
can truly say, that I can’t avoid doing as _she_ wishes to have me
without a word of direction. Besides I am altogether too happy to have
it natural or lasting; and the method of educating their children
separate from each other, and away from the example of their parents, is
barbarous and unnatural.”

At the completion of this impulsive padric, Mr. Welson quietly
observed,—“If we are to judge from appearances, we could not question
the source of your improvement. But as appearances are deceptive, and
the evil-disposed seek solitude for indulgence, the cloud of a witness
rose from beneath the skirt of your coat, with the odor of tobacco from
your suddenly concealed pipe, to confirm your shame in the presence of
purity. If your soul has been tempted, it has been from gross indulgence
to purity.”

The padre abashed relapsed into silence. But Dr. Baāhar, who had for a
butterfly consideration furnished him with the means of indulgence,
undertook his vindication, which he commenced with the syllogistic
proposition: “We will certainly admit that your spasmodic sarcasms are
poetical refinements upon fact, but I contend that you are neither
scientific or logical in your deductions. If God created man with
reasoning instincts, they were undoubtedly intended for invention and
indulgence. Again, in depriving children of their natural protectors’
care and example, is in open controversion of Divine will. As for me, I
do not assume to be more wise in my day, than my ancestors were in
theirs. By the assumptions of your theory, founded upon the partial
knowledge of these egotistical Heracleans, who have been shut out from a
knowledge of the world from time immemorial, we should repudiate the
transmitted experience of our ancestors. I shall not be guilty of so
gross an act of ingratitude; my father the counselor, and his
progenitors, ate their saur-kraut and sausages, drank their beer, smoked
their pipes, and were excellent swordmen and genealogists, and I intend
to do honor to the habits they inculcated.”

Pettynose the buzz recorder of sound, and Lindenhoff the genealogical
curator of sound, with Viscouswitzs the photographic artist, sided with
Dr. Baāhar, the latter sensuously remarking: “The women may be accounted
puritanically beautiful, but they lack the bouquet of civilization, as
well as the natural flavor peculiar to the creole variations; and as to
pleasure, I could derive as much by an association with marble busts in
the atélier of a sculptor. There is an air of repulsiveness about them
that repels geniality, so that I never feel comfortable in their
presence, and but for the encampment of the Vermejo Indians on the lake,
I would, with the first opportunity, throw up my engagement and return
to the haunts of civilization; for of all things I abhor pedantry in men
and puritanism in women.”

“We are as yet novices in the ways of the Heracleans,” urged Mr. Dow,
“and but imperfectly understand their motives of action or system of
self government. To judge them from our partial impressions, which your
personal opinions bespeak, is proof positive that the cavils of surmise,
peculiar to individuals, originated the prejudices to which you have
given voice. To me the addenda to their morning salutation and evening
anthem of praise, as rendered by M. Hollydorf, bore advisory reference
to the source of their happiness.” M. Hollydorf fully endorsed Mr. Dow’s
views.




                              CHAPTER XI.


M. Hollydorf after morning salutation mustered his assistants for the
inauguration of the legitimate duties entailed by his commission; as he
had become fully impressed with the necessity of “working up” a
sufficient number of experimental proofs for the basis of a preliminary
despatch of intention. Selecting a retired portion of the latifundium
for his field of operations they commenced their labors in good earnest.
Of all the civilized nations of the world, we can claim for the Germans
a just preëminence in those departments of science devoted to the
investigations of the habits and associations of insect life. In truth,
the enthusiasm shown for insect explorations has extended itself to
every department of their national existence; from the palace to the
cabin particular attention is devoted to hunting, impaling, and
preserving their cadavers, arranged in order, genera, and species, in
mausoleum cabinets for mummified exhibition as shrines for the
enraptured gaze of Teutonic devotees. Even the mediæval Gael of the
Scottish Highlands never possessed, in living endowment, an attritive
iota of the associate luxurious zest imparted from their joint stock
investments, or the Egyptian, of yore, in his necropolitan collections,
a source of such vain-glorious gratification.

M. Hollydorf’s first day’s investigations were rewarded with the
discovery of old species, familiar to his eye, under new and strange
combinations, affording conclusive evidence of exotic transfusion in
propagation at some remote period. In semi-meditation, with a
disinclination for food and midday rest, he continued his preparatory
investigations while his assistants refreshed themselves with their
accustomed rations and siesta. Availing themselves of his invitation and
leisure, the prætor, Correliana, Mr. Welson, and Dow made their
appearance. Apologizing for interrupting his studies, Correliana
requested the privilege of subjecting a flower from her garden to the
magnifying power of the tympano-microscope? Assuring him, with its
presentation, that she felt certain, from its extreme beauty and purity
of fragrance, that it would attract a high order of animalculan
existence capable of appreciating its rare combinations. After a close
examination with his unaided eyes, he declared it to be of an unknown
species and as peculiar in its rare beauty, novelty of its perfume, and
delicate pungency of its impression, as the Heraclean representatives of
woman kind were superior and distinct from their civilized genera in the
purity of their habits and customs. With this combined pronunciamento of
comparison as a vent to his enthusiastic admiration, he placed the
flower in the field receptacle of the tympano-microscope for focal
magnifying reflection of its parasitic habituary residents, for
inspection and classification in substance and sound. With an
exclamation of surprise, compounded of fear and amazement, he started
back from the instrument exposing to view the petals and pistils peopled
with a multitude of diminutive human beings, who were convulsed with
sneezing spasms of laughter, which they tried in vain to suppress with
expedients in common use by our kind. The tympanum in sound articulation
reverberated their tiny cachinnations and sternutatory explosions with
such comical effect, that the prætor and Correliana were compelled,
notwithstanding all their efforts to avoid the impulsive sympathy of
contagion, to join issue with this mirthful introduction of our savans
to a kindred animalculan representation of our race. While equally
subject to the uncontrollable spasms of mirthful laughter and dumb
amazement, the spectators to this scene of apparent conjurement were
held speechless.

The leader of the diminutive apparitions at length leaped lightly, as if
propelled by a sneeze, upon the stage within the reflecting compass of
the tympano-microscope. Then, after a few ineffectual attempts to regain
his composure, he finally succeeded in obtaining sufficient control to
offer the following apologetic address, which gradually recalled us to
our senses; but not in sufficient degree for a realization of their
actual existence as human beings, free from the magic attaint of fears
conjured from superstitious instinct. He thrice repeated to attract our
attention from the stupor of amazement: “Men of science, and deliverers
of the Heracleans, our protogean affinities!” Our partial attention
secured, he continued. “If through the disability of our Dosch, or chief
advisor, our selection as Manatitlan ambassadors to welcome you, in our
people’s behalf as the preservers of our co-affinities in affection,
should prove a source of discredit from our undignified appearance on
presentment, it would prove a source of lasting sorrow. But we feel
certain that you will extend to us the favor of believing that we are
not inclined to untimely mirth, notwithstanding the example we have
given to the contrary. With the concerted desire to impress you at a
suitable moment with the reality of our existence as a race, Mistress
Correliana probably forgot the keen sensitiveness of our schneiderian
membranes to pungent odors, and with the intention of giving as much
eclat as possible to our introduction, selected from her garden the most
beautiful and fragrant flower of its parterres. The novelty of our
emprise withheld our attention from the flower until it was placed in
your hand for examination, then too late to effect an exchange, we
braced ourselves to resist its effects. Hence our humiliating condition
when exposed to your view and hearing! Thrown off our guard by the
transformation effected in our size and sound of our voices, and above
all by the consternation manifested in the expression of your faces, we
could not resist the impulse of our naturally mirthful dispositions.
That the infection should reach and overpower the more staid humor of
our cousins, you will not wonder, when you recall your own and our
disordered extremes. If you will control your perturbed emotions for a
moment’s reflection you will be able to realize the irresistible nature
of our impressions under these combined effects. Withal, when our
existence and presence in auramentation becomes familiar as a recognized
reality, you will find in our joyous dispositions a ready explanation
for these ante phases of our first personal introduction.”

Upon this hint, Correliana conquered sufficient composure to introduce
the speaker as Manito, the Prætor of Maniculæ, the chief city of
Manatitla. Then with the accompaniment of a spasmodic inclination to
sneeze, as they leaned over the serrated edges of the petals, the
tribunes were introduced individually by name. This process was
lengthened by occasional suppressed tendencies to mirthful outbreaks,
which gave M. Hollydorf and his companions an opportunity for partial
recovery from their dazed state of amazement. When sufficiently restored
for intelligent comprehension, the flower was changed for one of less
pungent odor, and Manito from the rostrum point of a petal continued his
address.

“From our diminutive size we willingly subscribe to the designation your
nomenclature bestows upon insect animalities which are but partially
visible to your unaided eyes. Still we do not disdain our size, for with
the Manatitlans it has received the compensating privilege of a
perception that enabled them to distinguish the evident object of
mankind’s intelligent endowment above the instincts of associate
animality.

“Like individuals of your race, ours vary in size. Some among the
Manatitlans have reached in stature a height approximating in a remote
degree to your well formed dwarfs of a standard monstrosity in the
diminutive extreme sufficient for the excitement of wondering surprise.
Our own divisions are expressed in terms rating from the smallest in
stature, which are called tits; these form the masses, but with a
sensible diminution in numbers from an upward tendency to the second
degree of elevation from the majority. The middle class are styled
mediums. With every generation this grade has been increased in
proportion with the decrease of the tits, and ranks in status with your
“well to do” money grade of merchants and speculators. The giantesco
enjoys the highest statutory standing in the ranks of size, representing
your titled duke commanders, and subalterns of lordly and knightly
degree. But these distinctions are only perceptible to the eye, and in
no way arbitrary in the assumption of prerogative stature rights above
those below. As our scholastic term of education commences with the
infant at the age of two years: the first stage that directs and
controls the infantile perceptions and cravings of instinct is styled
pupillage, and is under the supervision of the censor and nurse, who
hold the instinctive exaggerations of parental fondness in check from
birth. This habilitative stage of matriculation is the most trying for
direction, as upon it depends the matriculant’s after power of self-
control. The second stage of nonage commences at seven, when the self-
devising perceptions begin to expand into individuality, that require
educated direction, and leading encouragement. At fourteen, or the
pubertal stage, the first indications appear for the premonitory
inauguration of status rank established for the distinctions of size.
The initiatory discipline of the scholar entering upon his senior term,
induces the tractor disposition of the censorial advisor, in association
with his juniors; in place of your form system of “bullying” the nether
“fag,” whose weakness makes submission a virtue, when subject to the
classical distinctions of arbitrary power. The seniors become assistant
tutors to the censors and teachers from the age of fourteen until the
close of their twenty-third year, when they graduate; and after a
probationary term of three months’ “courtship,” with the connubial
censors’ selection of affiances, are married. This cursory glance will
serve for an introductory insight into our natural system of education
designed for the direction of our immortal endowment in perceptive
flight above the body’s ephemeral gratification of instinctive desire.

“Of other matters, pertaining to our actual realization of an enduring
happiness, you will be advised by our advisors; as our interview was
designed solely for your recognition and realization of our existence as
a race in diminuendo alliance with your own. Our associations with your
race are of a privileged description, which from the concentrated
acuteness of our sensitive perceptions, enables us to divine your
thoughts by auramental espionage. If you will give a moment’s
investigation to the impressions of thought, when free from the turmoil
of suspicious doubts, which now assail and render your efforts for
reasonable perception void, you will find that they are all distinctly
enunciated in the thalmus auditorium, which is the focal centre for
maturing sensorial observations. Our size, and practical knowledge of
the sensitive departments of your ears, enables our giantescoes to gain
the aural sinus without provoking titillation, and its proximity to the
vibrating portal, or vellum auditorium, permits our sensitive
perceptions of sound to realize your thought articulations before they
are matured for retentive comparison, or the vocalized utterances of
speech communication. So that in reality, we hold the gigas (the name
word we use for the designation of your race in contradistinction to our
own) subject to our direction, when free from the ruling habits of
instinctive indulgence, which defy control. As the previous knowledge of
our advisers has preferred you to their confidence, I will state that
our means of direction are through thought substitution, which the
giantesco is able to modulate with ventriloquial variations of voice for
the receptive nullification of those derived from their own sensoriums.
Of course, the effects vary with the intensity of the subject’s command
over his own sensorium, and the absorbing influence of educated
impressions imparted from habits and customs. As an example, I will now
state that M. Hollydorf, in his turmoil of doubts, feels that Mistress
Correliana has in some way imposed upon his confidence; but my informer
says that his impressions are in no wise capable of assuming the power
of self control, so that upon our own responsibility we will exonerate
Correliana from all deceptive intentions; as she was subject to our
control in withholding from you a knowledge of our presence, as the
mysterious source of her guiding premonitions, and means of obtaining
information of human affairs in the world beyond the inclosing walls of
their isolated city. Now, in turn, we ask you to withhold from your
companions the result of your day’s explorations, that you may observe
the influence we are able to exert for their mystification, and the
development of the intangible resources of instinct, which subserve for
the delusive beguilement of reason from the intelligent direction of
creative indications. This much, will prove sufficient for your night’s
cogitations, but to-morrow the Dosch and his advisors will instruct you
in the weightier matters pertaining to our educating system devised for
self control. As you are still hovering in the clouds of doubt, we will
regale your senses, for composure, with a musical olio. M. Hollydorf, at
the period of our first introduction, was considered an excellent judge
of music, and at times amused himself with amateur compositions, one of
which pleased me, and on my return to Manatitla I presented it to our
musical censor, who adopted and incorporated it with our salutations. We
will now render it, that you may pass censure or commendation upon the
accuracy of our version; for of all the selfish kleptomanias, that of
stealing musical compositions, and mutilating them in transposition for
an author’s reputation founded upon a lie, is the most contemptible
within the range of barren instinct. Fortunately, only the younger
branches of the Mouthpat tribes of our species have ever been guilty of
a witless invention base enough to seek gratification from so mean a
subterfuge.”

With this apologetic prelude Manito marshaled his choristers along the
borders of the dependent curves of the petals facing his bewildered
auditors and rendered the following stanzas with an effect that revived
them from their superstitious fears:—

                “From darkness dread, the dawn appears!
                Mother of day, whose dewy tears,
                Distilled from the labors of the night,
                Greet with joy, the sun birth of light.

                “Hail, glorious mother of morn!
                Beautiful type of woman’s form,
                When hallowed from instinctive night,
                She hails, at birth, a son of light.”

M. Hollydorf recalling the occasion and source of inspiration, glanced
at Correliana with a furtive look of anguish. For the prompting source
of the stanzas, was a longing desire that woman’s beauty should be
adorned with more lasting “graces” than those bestowed by the
fashionable dressmaker, dancing master, and boarding-school mistress, in
hopeful premonition of an immortality with joys exceeding the gossiping
allurements of a heaven of sense. The look of sympathy he received in
return banished from his thoughts doubts, and suspicions of supernatural
agency. Manito, observing the confidence expressed in his glance, and
the more ready belief of Mr. Welson and Dow, that the Manatitlans in
reality represented a diminutive department of human mortality, said,
that as his mission for the day had been fulfilled in degree beyond
expectation, they would not prejudice their success by prolonging the
interview, but would leave them with a new zest for the transmission of
one of their best melodies. He then rearranged his choristers and
rendered “Home, sweet home,” with an effect that caused them to join in
thought sympathy with the affectionate harmony of Manatitlan expression.
At the close the prætor and tribunes of Maniculæ bid their first giga
audience good-by, and disappeared from view. Correliana then signaled
the stoop of her favorite falcon Merlin from his circling wafts above
the latifundium; after a short perch of a few moments upon her wrist, he
was despatched, as she announced, to Maniculæ, bearing back the prætor,
Manito, and tribunes.

Mr. Welson was the first to break silence after their departure, with a
long drawn,—“Whew,” as a prelude to the exclamation, “Ah, ha! mistress
Correliana, we have the secret now to all your mysterious enactments,
which inclined those the least superstitiously prejudiced to credit you
with an inheritance tinctured with the pretensions of your sibylline
ancestry. But our wondering amazement is scarcely less than it would
have been under the superstitious impression that you really possessed
the power invoked by the ancient sibyl. Still the manifestation of a
visible source, however small, is far more agreeable to our
perceptions.”

Correliana answered, with a pleading smile, “You will surely forgive,
and pardon me for retaining a secret of such importance, in the face of
all your kind and confiding acts, now that you have learned that I
received it in trust from a source so well qualified with the essentials
of prudent direction? The Dosch, however, will more fully state the many
causes that rendered its retention desirable. But of this you can rest
assured, the Manatitlans are _bonâ fide_ representatives of animalculan
humanity; and when I state that we are solely indebted to them for our
redemption from the bondage of instinct, you will understand the nature
of our trust in their direction.”

Beckoning the stoop of a falcon, it alighted upon her wrist. She then
exposed, beneath what they had supposed to be an ornamental attachment
of designation, a howdah. Then taking from her pocket pouch a reel of
filmy thread,—attenuated to a degree that rendered it almost
imperceptible to the eye, she wound the free end around Mr. Welson’s
finger, then asked him to try its strength. With his utmost exertion,
tried with many devices for its separation, the thread remained
unparted. She then explained that the materials, from which, in perfect
combination, it was drawn, were mineralized with flexile and vis inertia
substances in adaptation for a great variety of purposes, subserving for
the protective furtherance of health, comfort, and personal purity. Also
for protective defense, “as it is impenetrable to the swiftest fledged
missiles when wrought into textile fabrics.” But its most esteemed
peculiarities are repulsive resistance to uncleanly cohesion, combined
with a nonconducting neutrality in the transmission of cold and heat,
causing the refuse excretions of the body to evaporate without
obstructing the rejecting orifices of the ducts, when used in its
adaptation for raiment. In part, we have been able to imitate this
valuable acquisition for the protective preservation of our persons from
decomposing agencies, which are constantly in a fermentable and
putrefactive state of conceptive action for the production of renewed
vitality varied in degenerative series. But of these matters the
Manatitlans will advise you in due time. In your present state of
perturbation it will but little avail to extend our conversation into
details that require for a complete understanding consecutive
exposition.

After Correliana and her father had taken their leave of the four
favored witnesses of the new grade revelation in the status of humanity,
they remained standing in the same position, absorbed with contending
emotions of doubt and belief, until aroused by the approach of Dr.
Baāhar and the padre. Then, with a forced recovery, M. Hollydorf
announced his intention of discontinuing his explorations for the time
being; which afforded his assistants a desired relief, for with their
few hours’ occupation they had discovered in themselves an unwonted
dislike for the professional details of their occupation. While on their
way to deposit the tympano-microscope in the house designated by
Correliana as the one intended for the reception of the Dosch, the four
maintained their thoughtful silence until after they had bestowed upon
the instrument of revelation a careful disposal. Then M. Hollydorf
sententiously remarked, “Although still perplexed, I am confident in the
full integrity of Correliana’s assurance that these Manatitlans are
_bonâ fide_ embodiments of humanity, with intelligent capabilities
superior to our own! But it is hard to reconcile them with any of the
preconceived ideas of our race. They certainly advocate, with practical
demonstration, a more direct and reasonable way for the attainment of
present and prospective happiness, than that of redemption from sin by
saving grace?”

“By all that there is in us, capable of assuming the control of
judgment, we cannot avoid their own, Miss Correliana’s, and the
confirmation of our own senses in attestation of the fact of their real
presence,” added Mr. Welson.

“For my own part,” said Mr. Dow, “there is to me nothing more strange in
their discovery, than in that of the Heracleans, now that we have
recovered, in a measure, from the first startling effects. It has
occurred to me frequently, of late, that there must have been some
interior creative object in the gradations of instinct, and ultimate
alliance of superhuman intelligence with the highest grade? It is
certainly impossible for me to reason myself into the belief that we
have been endowed with a perception of goodness, and the necessity of
purity for its attainment, to have them dispensed with in life for the
substitution of the instinctive greed of selfishness, with the
accommodating proviso of repurification by an act of saving grace!
Neither can we disguise the fact, that we now think and act quite unlike
our former selves, with a sensible improvement in happiness, in freedom
from the selfish accessories we formerly thought necessary for its
assurance.”

At this point they were interrupted by the entrance of the prætor with
his wife and daughter, who came to inquire if M. Hollydorf wished to
suggest any change for the better accommodation of his instrument with
regard to light? In the expression of his satisfaction, M. Hollydorf
alluded not only to the wonderful preservation of the buildings, but
furniture, which appeared, in style, to have been coeval in manufacture
with the remnants seen in old Heraclea. In explanation the prætor said
that it was much easier to preserve from decay than to restore ruins.
But the means of preservation had been bestowed by Giganteo XVI., Dosch
of the Manatitlans, as a legacy to the sons of Indegatus, associate
prætors of Heraclea, who were the first of our race that became
personally acquainted with animalculan humanity. “You will find all of
the unoccupied houses of the city in like good condition with this, and
equally free for your inspection and occupation.”

As the occasion was opportune, M. Hollydorf consulted with those present
how he might prepare a statement of the day’s developments sufficiently
credible for the acceptable belief of the Home Society? The prætor
advised him to defer his cause of perplexity to the Dosch, who would
resolve it readily, from a personal knowledge of the characteristic
peculiarities of the members of the R. H. B. Society. Then Mr. Dow
preferred his petition for their united aid in the advancement of his
historical compendium of the Heracleans. This all were pleased to
accord, as it was through his indomitable perseverance that the
discovery was accomplished, before the City of the Falls had been
reduced to the tenantless condition of its senior counterpart. As he was
referred to me for special aid in compilation, from his lack of
knowledge in the constructive use of the Heraclean idiom,—which was to
us personally a source of mutual regret,—it will be well to state in
anticipation of a similarity in diction of our separate labors, that I
have been in no way beholden to him for the style I have adopted in
recording the historiographical account of the corps investigations. I
trust that this egoistic explanation will prove sufficient in efficacy
to redeem me from plagiaristic odium?




                              CHAPTER XII.


The prætor and his family, including Cleorita and Oviata Arcos, with the
Four, awaited, on the morning succeeding the eventful day of Manito’s
animalculan introduction, the coming of the Dosch of Manatitla in the
audience chamber of the house, dedicated by Correliana in aptitude to
the developing powers of the tympano-microscope, “the auriculum.” After
a short delay of expectation, the courier falcon appeared at poise, from
which in swift descent it came in downward incline direct to its perch
on Correliana’s wrist. But a second elapsed before the tympanum reëchoed
in cheery tones of salutation the voice of our expected visitor. Our
attention attracted to the field of magnifying reflection, discovered a
coterie of animalculans, of nearly the same size, grouped about the
speaker. With the salutation, “Afferens scientiam errantes gigantes,” he
addressed us as follows:—

                  *       *       *       *       *

For ages untold, our race have waited in patient expectation for the
morning’s dawn when they could salute yours face to face, and impart to
you a source of happiness that in life realizes communion with
immortality. To us has been vouchsafed this coveted privilege, and it
shall be our study to improve it to your advantage. Notwithstanding the
malapropos accident—casting upon Correliana an arch glance that wrought
for her face a scarlet veil—of yesterday, which detracted from the
dignity of an introduction so important to the regenerative welfare of
your race, we were glad that auspicious mirth was the trophy of the
occasion, rather than tears of grief, of which we shall be mindful in
adjudging our censure to the cause. Joyous mirth we have esteemed an
evidence of goodness, for it declares itself beyond the reach of selfish
impediment that breeds evil intention; even when the foibles of our kind
become the subjects of humorous provocation. Mirth is ill timed, when
preconcerted with a knowledge that a portion of those present will be
unable to appreciate the humorous incentive; as it opens wide the door
of suspicion with your peoples, who have been educated under the partial
sway of national habits and customs. Dissimilarity in habits and
customs, under national patronage, begets from seeming incongruity a
disposition to gibe with missile retorts, fledged and tipped with
ironical sarcasms, as rankling in effect as the pointed weapons in the
mouth of Mr. Welson’s knighted chief. To be frank, if the ludicrous
scene of yesterday had occurred with matured acquaintance, I should not
have spared the demure, but conscious blushes of the fair medium. Our
first acquaintance with you, although not mutual in personal
recognition, is of older date than yesterday, and upon it has been
founded our predilections, which in train have led to the many
concurrent circumstances favoring the happy issue of our more direct
scheme, devised for the liberation of your race from the pampering
trammels of instinct. It would have been quite easy for our first
giantescoes to have obtained an introduction to your race, if they had
emulated the desire of being exhibited as an iotian monstrosity for the
gratification of giga greed and curiosity. But fortunately for our
present hoped-for issue, our system of education, devised for the
development of affectionate confidence, encouraged the past generations
of our race to wait for an opening free from the entailment of
experimental disadvantage. A knowledge of our race for the gratification
of your scientific savants curiosity, would have been as profitless for
good, as their sight-seeing acquaintance with the moon and stars. Our
Manatitlan sages have from the earliest period recommended extreme
caution to prevent the premature introduction of our race to yours. The
favorable indications to be watched for in premonition of a successful
issue were those of extreme folly, heralding a closing cycle; for the
contrast afforded by the result of our happy example would attract
kindly imitation of those inclined to affectionate goodness.

Desideratus, one of our most approved prognosticators, deposed that the
affections of woman afford the best test of a closing giga cycle. When
frivolity and the gossiping comparisons of vanity gain the ascendency
over natural affection, inherent as the birthright of woman, then you
may know that the symbolic serpent’s tail has received its final circle
inclination for union with the mouth. This inclination was foreshadowed
in the eighteenth century, with invention of power looms; which with the
largely increased acceleration of steam, fabricated in excess of the
world’s actual requirements for healthy protection and comely adornment.
With steam as an inductive aid to civilized progression, the Eugenic era
was ushered in, when the frail mortal tenements of women became subject
to empirical vanity, and in rivalry, the standard-bearers for cumbersome
mechanical products, to the utter perversion of healthy elasticity,
comfort, and their special vocation of fostering for immortality
affectionate goodness. This dereliction of giga women from their
manifest duty, has brought in train domestic and dynastic miseries,
while from dreary self conviction their hopeless prospect closes with
the grave. As we have now adventured the only opportunity that has ever
occurred, with a prospect of success, for extending the influence of our
happy experience to your race, we will with our introduction premise a
description of _Our Country_.

Manatitla is situated in the Andean district of La Plata, with a
southern aspect. It occupies a space between the parallels of 20° 40˝
and 30° south latitude and 40° 50° west longitude, embracing an area of
forty square furlongs, of Manatitlan measurement. Its surface is
diversified, combining in well-defined variety mountains, hills, and
vales, with their concomitant streams, lakes, and brooks; affording with
arable advantages, prospects unrivaled in beauty, which have been
enhanced by the grateful labor of its inhabitants in acknowledgment for
the benefits bestowed. The climate is salubrious and free from the
extremes of heat and cold, having a valley altitude varying but little
from six thousand feet above the estuary of the La Plata. The adjacent
country is occupied by the giga and animalculan wild hordes. The Minim
is the largest river. Its source is derived from Lake Areta, located in
the Andean spur of Ultisimma; flowing in a northeasterly direction it
finally becomes tributary to the Vermejo. On the northwestern bank is
situated our chief city, Maniculæ. Forty of our miles below, on the same
bank, is situated the City of Iota, containing twenty thousand
inhabitants. Nearly opposite the last named city, is the town of Speck,
its inhabitants, in transition, being chiefly occupied in the
manufacture of auro-silicate for edificial construction and textile
fabrics, rendering them indestructible and repulsive to cumulative
adhesion. The entire population of Manatitla is estimated at eighteen
millions, with a healthy tendency to a continued rapid decrease in
number, from causes which will be described hereafter.

_The Traditional History of Manatitla_, is coeval with the imaginary
date of Mauna Che’s advent as a deity from the La Plata into Alta Peru,
reaching in your time measurement to eleven thousand years, which
probably embraces relics of truth, among others a like origin with the
Heracleans; as we are without doubt descended from castaway parasites of
gigas from the eastern continent. But as it is a constant repetition of
acts of oppression, in kind with your classical written history, we will
not shock you with their rehearsal.

_The Actual, or Written History of Manatitla_, was commenced in the
latter portion of the reign of King Primus, from which dates our
transition period, or emancipation of our people from the instinctive
rule of the stomach and its engendered lusts. But from its resemblance
in factional disruptions to your own, culminating in a parallel to their
cycle condition, we will only allude to the causes that immediately
preceded, and in tendency wrought the changes that finally effected
partition from old habits, and the reverenced usages of instinct.
Arbitrary, religious, and civil exactions, seconded by compulsory
persuasion against all nonconformists, signalized the tendencies of the
period, and gave birth to an ultra instinctive race, styled liberal
democrats, who claimed the inalienable right of suffragian equality
bestowed upon the lower orders of the animal creation, in the exercise
of their untrammeled state of field and forest freedom. The regular
national church, and king, persecuted the nonconformists and schismatics
with dire vengeance, under the patronage of godhead personification,
translating the living heretics with tortures, burnings, and repetitions
of drowning suffocations by resuscitations from a moribund state, and
like admonitory chastenings in transition for the final judgment of
their long enduring and merciful godhead. The persecuted schismatics
emigrated to distant lands, in order that they might worship their God
of reformation in freedom from invidious restriction of rites. When
located, they in turn used the same strenuous arguments to subvert the
tribal forms of worship. Gaining the ascendency, with destructive
agents, they deprived the aboriginals of local option, forcing them to
conform, with death and displacement, until they had obliged the remnant
descendants of their benefactors to accept a conditional exile on the
outskirts of progressive civilization, in transit for a grave ultimatum.
The notable invention of letters signalized the latter portion of the
reign of Primus, and to it he laid claim as king rief discoverer; which
in the law of entail declares the subject a utensil to be used for the
exaltation of kingly prerogative; being identified with everything that
pertains to the glory of the throne and its legitimate scionry, his
assumptive appropriation was sustained with ministerial affidavits and
legal opinions, in attestation of King Primus’s great literary and
inventive capacity, allied to clemency, justice, and generosity. But
after his death, there was found concealed in the hut of a bard, who had
disappeared just anterior to the announcement of the king’s invention,
parchments inscribed with the newly introduced characters, which set
forth the bard’s adverse claims in these terms:—

                  With symbolic signs, I have found,
                  The art of representing sound.
                  On distant business one can send,
                  Or with them greet a distant friend.

From this scrap of post circumstantial testimony, it is evident that he
either intended to filch from the king, or that the king did obtain his
reputation for literary invention from the fior’s or bard’s genius. The
latter presumption receives probable confirmation from our aura-mention
of similar pretentions to authorship advanced by giga potentates of the
past and present age.

The rule of King Primus was of the most despotic description ever
enforced by an arbitrary will over the weak subserviency of plodding
human instinct, which in kindred affinity with the dogs, is content to
give vent to a growling yelp when the freedom of its tail is ground by
the heel of the oppressor. Whenever these constitutional growls
foreboded an insurrectionary show of teeth, the gregarious spirit of
commune revolt was allayed by the grant of a new charter of rights, but
if this precedental sop failed to lay the retaliative spirit engendered
by oppression, the current of their wrath was turned against their
neighbors, with arbitrary conjurations as the provocations, of war. As
an infallible test of his infallibility death displaced him to make room
for a successor. The people put on sackcloth, and rolled in the dust of
humiliation, in mournful semblance of grief for the loss of their demi-
god, whose dealings had been grievous and past finding out.

After public eulogistic exaltations, funereal orations and lamentations
had subsided, his only son was proclaimed successor with jubilant
rejoicings. But Justinatus, the son, resolutely announced his
determination to reject the succession, recommending the people to
select from the wise men of the nation a council to decide upon a form
of government best suited in adaptation for the requirements of the
people; but they with their faces and thoughts turned to the rear, in
reverence for past usage, clamored for a king. But they found in
Justinatus a man as determined for the enforcement of right, as his
father had been for wrong. He commanded them to turn their faces to the
future, and act according to his direction, not for themselves or their
generation alone, but for those who were to succeed them. Submissive to
the letter of his direction, but in conformity with precedental creed,
they elected eight men by ballot, and instructed them to proclaim
Justinatus king. With this evidence of their precedental stupidity he
assumed the power of directing them for their own good, selecting four
men of as well approved wisdom as his judgment could discover, he placed
at their head his early instructor as chief advisor, with the titled
designation of Dosch. After this inauguration of an advisorial system,
Justinatus, as a pupil, received from them instruction; combining, with
his advance in knowledge, his aid in promoting the practical development
of means for insuring equality in thought and judgment, necessary for
the promotion of the common welfare.

In consideration of the fluctuating variations incident to common usage,
their first endeavors were directed for the devisement of a method that
would insure exampled conformity in act. The difficulty of effecting
uniform compatibility, in the then present habits of the people, soon
became apparent. As a dernier of preparation, a division of labor was
enforced, according with the personal healthy capacity of each
individual. Under this system of equalized industry for community
support, the drones were soon discovered, and subjected to the
taskmaster supervision of those capable of exercising self control for
the common good. Of course the outcry of slavery and oppression became
rampant with the ill disposed and vicious; but compelled association
with the good soon wrought a happy change; but not before many
revolutionary schemes of revolt had been planned by the democratic
majority, and nipped in the bud. The great bar to the full success of
the renovating process, was the all absorbing lust for selfish
gratification, procured from the sacrifice of others’ welfare.
Exhortations and demonstrations of the evil effects and instability of
pleasures having a material dependency upon the appetites and passions
of the body were of no avail. Stimulating provocations, for the
production of inordinate appetites, had held an increasing sway from
time immemorial, and the infatuation still continued to subvert the
efforts of the Doschate of advisors for the establishment of a rational
source of happiness, that should extend its blessings for the reciprocal
appreciation of all. Laws and penal restrictions proved of easy evasion,
and the local option of individuals native to Manatitla, having a desire
to establish in perpetuity the happiness of their people, as a beacon
light of example, were openly defied by aliens. To restrict emigration,
which was claimed as a privileged right ordained as an inherent instinct
of animality, they did not dare! as it was declared by the majority an
assumption that would directly controvert the rights of septs and
nationalities guaranteed by deity. The civilized progenitors of the
races represented by tribes and small nationalities occupying the
country adjacent to Manatitla, had undoubtedly been parasitical attaches
to giga castaways like those of the Manatitlans. This stumbling block of
perversion, continued from generation to generation for centuries; until
the advent of the Dosch Desiderata, who with the aid of his advisors,
turned the tide anarchy by the adoption of foreigners as guests,
withholding the privilege of citizenship for bestowal upon their
children’s children of the third generation. This inaugurated an era
memorable for the change of precedental precept, based upon warlike
achievements, into a source of abhorrence with the increasing minority.
Thoughtful consideration bestowed upon example for the transmitted
improvement of future generations in goodness, produced a wonderful
effect upon the actors of the then present generation by the induction
of harmony from reciprocal goodwill. Through his wise deductions, that
clearly demonstrated the necessity of self government in association
with others, woman threw off her shroud of vanity, and labored earnestly
for the renewal of her lost prestige of trust, bestowed for the
transmission of purity and goodness. The incipient struggles of the
minority, under the direction of Desiderata, were short and decisive;
but for the time being evoked with groveling bitterness fierce invective
from the majority. A memorial address of remonstrance, from the
democratic majority, against the abrogation of the rights of
citizenship, in the first and second degree of alien residence, set
forth, that God had created all men free and equal without respect to
color or habits, with the command that they should work out their own
way of salvation, and that each individual was guaranteed an inalienable
right to participate in the government of his fellow man. “And that,
whereas, as hereinafter stated,” the citizens of Manatitla represent
different nationalities, it was but just and right that they should have
a voice in the council of advisors, in order that they might guard and
protect their own liberties and safety. With this preamble, imitated
from giga precept, the contest can be realized without repeating the
stale platitudes of democratic subterfuge. The promulgated reply was as
follows:——

“The Dosch of Manatitla and his advisors, to the alien guests
(heretofore, in acceptation, adopted citizens) of their people and
country, greeting! We have received your petition, and have reviewed
with care the requests you have proffered. Our answer is set forth in
the subjoined proclamation.

“‘To the residents of Manatitla of foreign birth! As it is our matured
desire to emancipate the people native to our country from their own
degrading habits, and the deleterious example of those derived from
extraneous source, we herewith announce the corrective enactments we
have devised for the collective well being and happiness of all within
our advisorial control. As it is manifest, from the conclusive evidence
of creative design, that mankind are in bodily and functional alliance
with all the different grades of animality, through the representative
agency of omnivorous instinct; it is also as clearly evident that his
endowed superiority resides in his privileged capacity for self control,
with an ultimate intention equally apparent. For a rational realization
of this saving clause, an easy estimate can be made of all the tangible
sources of happiness held by human kind independent of the body’s
instincts. As upon these depend our hopes of happiness in life, in
premonition of immortality, it is imperative with all to hold them in
reciprocal cultivation for the confluent control—in subjection—of the
passions inherent with the vital functions of animality. As woman, the
endowed source and mother of our race, when free from the attaint of
man’s selfish invention, expresses a natural repugnance to everything
opposed to purity and goodness, and in the full fruition of her
endowment is reverenced as the germ ideal of immortality; we have
through her a direct indication of the immortal source of happiness
bestowed with creative intention for the local option of mankind. In
negative assurance, that purity and goodness is the endowed source of
happiness; woman when lost to their sustenance, becomes hopelessly
degraded, sinking with loathsome taint below the vilest brute, and
utterly lost to the instinctive ties of affection, will not hesitate to
sacrifice mother, husband, sister, and child to the poisonous lust of
her reptile selfishness.

“‘That the cause of this ferocious degeneration, which has the power of
transforming woman from the glorious ideal of immortality, into an
object too repulsive for her destroyer to find in his vocabulary words
of beastly vulgarity sufficiently strong in the odor of putrefactive
designation for expressing in comparison the foulness of his scorn, is
derived from man’s insatiate devisement, cannot be denied! For the
exampled amendment of this woful cause of degeneration, we have provided
family censors, and nurses, in sufficient number for present
requirement, whose duty it will be to hold in check parental
indiscretions, and mutations incited from the instinctive variations of
fondness and petulance. With the close of the second year, the
provisorial charge of the family censor and nurse will be transferred
with the infant to the national school of the department in which they
reside, their guardian duties continuing until the seventh year, at the
commencement of which the child is matriculated as a pupil, with full
scholastic adoption by the censors and teachers. For the additional
furtherance of our system, subserving for the vindication of creative
indications for the elimination of our immortal endowment, we have
separated the sexes that in the process of educational attainment they
may remain free from the natural temptations inherent with instinct.

“‘The benefits conferred by our national system of education you have
realized in the peaceful confidence and unity imparted in after
association; also the sequent inseparable unity of our marriage
conjunctions. In truth, they are happily too apparent to be gainsaid. So
that in accepting our hospitality as guests, you cannot avoid, in
courtesy, a willing recognition of our rights of freehold preëmption,
for preserving our habits and customs of purity and goodness, intact
from the infringements of foreign attaint; or question the justice of
our privilege of enforcing their observance; or in default, question our
corrective enactments devised for the culprit’s realization of practical
liabilities incurred by the transgressor. These will be strictly
enforced. But that there may be no cavilings, with the hue and cry of
barbarous excess in punishment, we have provided accommodations adapted
to the specie degradation of the lower orders of animal instinct, of
sufficient capacity for associate occupation by human emulators of
bestiality in kind; through all the gradations from the _omnium
gatherum_ ‘swine,’ blood thirsty ‘tiger,’ down to the reptile
conservators of poison. For the correction of women who have lapsed from
their vocation of conservators of purity and goodness, into the
incipient stages of gadding and gossiping detraction, we have provided
cage apartments for their mutual accommodation with birds representing
their kind, in the hopping vent of thoughtless words. We have provided
for initiatory correction pavonias (animalculan peacocks) for the
exemplar admonition of the vain-glorious; and jab-boracidas (jackdaws
and magpies) for the likeness of gossipping repeaters; for the loud
mouthed and strepitant clackitas (parrots and cockatoos), and for the
‘fashionable’ imitators, simia curios (female monkeys). These, as
occasion may require, will extend invitations to their ‘likes’ of the
human sex to attend their levées, which will be subject to the
auditorial outside inspection of the public, if morbid curiosity should
prompt witnesses to the ordeal of misery. These provisos and corrective
conceptions have been devised for, and proved to be of universal
benefit, with the evidence of well attested experience; and we desire
your coöperation, as guests, for the perfection of our system designed
for the advancement of purity and goodness. But shall strenuously insist
that your children shall become participants in the privileges conferred
by our system of education.’”

As you will readily conceive, this proclamation of Desiderata and his
associates caused the fulmination of bitter invectives and threats of
vengeance, which served to vindicate the wisdom of the predicated
precautions. But the writers of the period state that in a few
generations the influence for good extended to savage tribes, who
petitioned for admission of their children into our national schools.
The improvement was so marked in its demonstration of a realizing source
of happiness, that but three centuries elapsed from the period of
organization, before the foreign nationalities were peacefully absorbed,
their subjects becoming educated citizens of Manatitla.

With the illustrative sketch that I have given of Manatitla’s transition
period of extension, you, and the readers of the historiographer’s
transcript, will readily understand the inceptive source and stages that
premised the establishment of our practical system of education. But
owing to the limited number of words and terms for the expression of
purity and goodness, with their practical variations, in your languages,
we are of necessity obliged to use them in frequent repetition.




                             CHAPTER XIII.


At this stage, M. Hollydorf interrupted the Dosch, with the assurance
that he was fully convinced not only of the actual existence of
animalculan humanity, but of the tangible wisdom of Manatitlan
providence, shown in their inauguration of rational system for
educational discernment, necessary for the fulfillment in life of happy
intention. “But the difficulty of making the home society realize by
letter the multiplying wonders in the course of our discoveries, puzzles
my invention for a credible method of imparting the information without
subjecting my sanity and integrity to impeachment. If you can, in your
wisdom, resolve me how I may absolve myself with credit in my official
correspondence, I shall certainly feel grateful.”

The Dosch smilingly assured him that he had no occasion for fear, as the
sensational novelty of truthful record, with a little auramental aid
rendered by the Manatitlans in the substitution of thought, would
suffice for the ready adoption and belief of his report, as a marvelous
indication of the age, in evidence of rapid progression under German
lead. With this closing advisorial suggestion the Dosch and his
companions departed for Maniculæ.

The abstracted mood, fitful and irrelevant conversation, with the daily
convocations of the four conservators of the Manatitlan secret, in the
house under the northern temple’s eastern wall, did not fail to attract
the wondering curiosity of their associates. But as M. Hollydorf had
emancipated the members of the corps from field duty, they found no lack
of pleasing occupation in rendering useful aid to the Heracleans. Doctor
Baāhar had enlisted the padre, for a quid pro quo, in the pursuit of
butterflies; the two curators of sound engaged in herding and woodland
pursuits; Jack and Bill, under Heraclean and Kyronese instruction,
engaged in “navigating” a small garden plot in the latifundium, with
amusing success, while Viscouswitzs, the artist, wooed the Indian maids
of the Vermejo tribe.

The Dosch, in continuation of his historical sketch of the Manatitlans,
passed to the period noted as the Heraclean epoch.

                  *       *       *       *       *

The third century of your Christian era was well advanced before they
were aware that there was a race of white gigas occupying a city not far
remote from Maniculæ. At that period distance was measured by the time
occupied in conveyance by the insects then in use for transportation;
but as the vitality of their bodies was subject to deciduous tenure,
travelers were obliged to confine their researches within the limits of
populated districts, between which adventitious paths were well defined.
The defective means of communication with remote Manatitlan provinces
had ever been a source of sincere regret. Still the lack of advancement
in the art of locomotion had never interfered with the actual
realization of happiness. The wood roach and beetle were used as insects
of draught in the preparation of the soil for cultivation, and the flea
for equisaltation, it being the favorite mount for distant journeys and
pleasure excursions. The first innovation upon these time honored extra
locomotive adjuncts, was effected by the persevering ingenuity and
daring courage of a medium named Bussee. He had from an early age
devoted his thoughts to natural history with the practical intention of
improving the native stock which was too diminutive to be made available
for transportation. As a boy he had been noted for a quick practical
judgment, displayed in his ability to eke out from scant means the
fulfillment of a desired end. Many of his improved domestic utensils are
still in use, in evidence of an inventive genius in advance of his age.
His habits were erratic, showing an impatience that disdained restraint
within the bounds of precedental usage. Still his affectionate desire to
confer public benefits attracted a grateful solicitude whenever his
absence was unusually prolonged. But as he rarely returned without some
valuable acquisition, confidence in his ability for self-protection
waived anxiety. At length an absence of two months without communicating
with his family, aroused public sympathy to such a pitch that a search
was decided upon. In preparation the citizens of Maniculæ had collected
in the anthemique to consult upon the most feasible means of conducting
the search.

When the direction was decided upon, and they were issuing forth for its
prosecution, they were startled by the gyrations of an apis isolata
(solitary bee) in close proximity to their heads. After a few eccentric
evolutions which excited a commensurate degree of alarm, their fears
were relieved by a shout of laughter in the jovial tones of the
absentee, who, by a skillful direction, caused the bee to alight in
their midst. When sufficiently assured of freedom from danger, his
parents and the Dosch approached near enough to obtain a view of his
mechanical appliances for guiding his prize. Between the wings of the
bee, upon his back, a net with latticed films, supported in dome shape
by stiff fibres, was attached. This turret was retained in place by
filaments, which passed beneath his body, in the articulation between
the body and thorax, so that his movements and winged action were not
impeded. To the antennæ, on either side, were attached filamental
guides, or reins, for directing his course, the proximal extremities
being coupled within the pilot cone. When assured of the strength and
security of the attachments, the Dosch and parents of Buzzee ventured on
a short experimental flight. As the insect circled, in company with his
mate, to gain a bee line, the daring volantaph caused him to execute a
variety of intricate evolutions, which at first alarmed his passengers,
who expostulated with him in reproof for his temerity. But when he
explained his wish to show them how completely the movements of the bee
were under his control, they no longer offered objections, their fears
being turned to admiration. When satisfied that air flights could be
conducted with more ease, safety, and swiftness, beyond the most
sanguine expectations of ancient or modern Manatitlan prognosticators,
his enterprise was highly commended. When landed the Dosch and advisors
expressed a desire, in behalf of the people, to listen to a relation of
his adventures in the anthemique, as it would be the means of avoiding
rehearsals from hearsay, with the defects that of necessity were
attendant upon individual versions. An hour before evening song the
anthemique was thronged with the citizens of Maniculæ anxious to hear
Buzzee’s relation of the expedients used for a capture so important in
its prospective bearings to the people of Manatitla. To enhance the
clearness of his demonstration, and at the same time show the dazed
docility of the bee, Buzzee directed his flight to the cantilor’s
rostrum, and after he had settled addressed the assemblage from the
pilot cone, in substance, as follows:—

“Although no stranger to your manifestations of affection, I am well
aware that in appearance I have been remiss in rendering you suitable
returns; but am certain that your confidence in the integrity of my
intentions will exculpate me from meditated indifference. I am now happy
in being able to bring you tangible proof that my wanderings were not
prompted from motives of selfishness or disdain. From my childhood I
have listened in silence to the oft repeated regrets that our extraneous
means of locomotion were limited to insects so lacking in the instincts
of intelligence necessary for successful direction. Those available for
locomotion were too ephemeral in their term of existence to be trusted
for conveyance far beyond the habitable limits of our country, which
from the illimitable firmament seemed to be but a mere speck upon the
earth’s surface. With a curious desire to learn the wonders of creation
overshadowed by the starry canopy, my earliest thoughts were directed to
the acquirement of the means necessary for safe transportation above the
earth’s surface. My thoughts were at first naturally directed to
artificial wings as the indicated means of progressive transposition
from earth to atmospheric space, without giving thought to the
consideration of ponderable adaptability. Human mortality, which
requires omnivorous support, declares itself ponderable in the vis
inertia of earth, in contrast with the airy attenuations that bespeak
adaptative intention in creating the tenants of space. In addition, with
the successful achievement of working wings, there would be inevitable
friction with the uncertainties of wear and derangement in flight, with
awkward position of ponderable suspension in space for repairs. So my
inventive genius was fain to hold itself convinced of the futility of
subverting the order of elementary adaptation, designed by the Creator
for the perfection of His intentions. Self convicted with the foolish
audacity of my labors to safely suspend with motion, and locomote with
facility ponderable humanity in space, I bethought myself of man’s
privilege of making subordinate organic vitality, with legitimate kindly
motive, subservient to his desired facilitations. For the elucidation of
my thought suggestions I directed my investigations to insects of
flight, to select from their varied species one suited to our
requirements. The primary qualifications necessary were sagacity,
supporting wing expanse, strength, longevity, and equal motion in
flight, with instinctive perception of individuality sufficient for
submission to our kindly direction. The efficient qualities indicated
for the selection of a winged conveyance, were first, size, with an
adaptation for control, in combination with a supporting buoyancy in
excess of its individual requirements. In the second degree
intelligence, with a longevity sufficient for compensative training, and
memory capable of retaining the imposed impressions, subject to the
recognition of personal direction foreign to their own volition. Added
to these essential qualifications, it was desirable that the insect
should be naturally inclined to sustain a long and swift flight. Bees
had early attracted my attention, but there were many objections to
their adoption that seemed insurmountable. Multitudinous in association,
and individually aggressive, were primary defects in disposition; while
in industrious habits and vocation they were subject to routine
enactments, which together with the tenacious nature and method of
collecting and disposing of their food threatened to end my ambitious
projects, in trial with them, in death from suffocation, or waxed
adhesion to their bodies or cells. The fear of being stalled and borne
to their cells for living incorporation, raised an insuperable dread,
that prevented me from coveting an experimental acquaintance with the
working orders of their kind. Often in my wanderings I have passed
beyond the boundaries of Manatitla in search of a locomotive
desideratum, which I had supposed necessary for the welfare of our race,
as well as a gratuitous vehicle for the gratification of my covetous
desire to rise into the realms of space, to survey beneath our
terrestrial place of abode. A month since I was returning homeward sad
and dispirited with continued disappointments, when at the close of day,
while the glowing tints of the setting sun still lingered in the glory
of their parting adornment to foliage and flowers, I was attracted by
the swift whirr of strange insect wings. In a moment my attention was
drawn with intent desire toward a pair of insects bearing a hybrid
resemblance to the bee family. After a careful reconnoitering
inspection, seemingly directed, first, to the quality of the flowers of
a tropical honeysuckle, and secondly, to see if they contained insect
occupants, they alighted upon the petals of the fairest. Unlike the
hoarding selfish instincts of their congeners of the bee kind, they
premised their labors with playful dalliance, partly upon wing and with
sprightly pedal evolutions, while darting in chase and counter chase in
and out from the petaled cups of the flowers. In a few minutes their
playful antics and fondlings ceased, then the male with an autocratic
appearance of gallantry assisted his spouse to load herself with the
sweets and waxy exudations of the flowers, this accomplished he sent her
unescorted away, evidently to unload in their store house. During her
absence he devoted his time to a general inspection of the flowers, with
the evident intention of selecting the best. In one he found a belated
droniva (a tropical representative of the bumble-bee family) who was
ejected without ceremony, although double the size of the audacious
usurper. His activity, independence, and cleanly regard for his own
person, disposed me to excuse his cavalier exaction of service drudgery
from his mate, as the duty seemed to afford her pleasure. In fact the
pair impressed me so favorably, that I determined to avail myself of the
opportunity to secure a permanent attachment.

“Years anterior, as you are aware, I perfected a harness in anticipation
of the fulfillment of my hopes of being able to make a capture suited
for our locomotive requirements. This I had carried with me in all my
excursions, and while my coveted prize was engaged in his erratic
flights, I placed myself in ambush in the fairest flower of his
selection, and had the gratification of securing him in leash before the
return of his mate. He soon became aware of unusual restraint, and
curious to learn its cause made experimental flights which gave me an
opportunity to test the success of my invention, and I was delighted to
find that I could direct his course with ease. Seemingly puzzled at the
loss of his voluntary power of direction, he made every available effort
to learn the cause of his sudden bereavement, and was pursuing his
investigations when his spouse returned. With mandibulations he quickly
communicated to her the restraint that had been placed upon his
movements during her absence. With evident anxiety she commenced a
search for the impedimental cause. In a few moments she discovered the
filamental guides that I had attached to his antennæ beneath the
carapace, but failing in her attempts to remove them, after a short
consultation, they rose in flight from the flower to the bee line of
their home with a marked show of anxiety, which made me feel a glow of
regret that my selfishness had been the cause of their disquietude. Once
only, in homeward flight, did I attempt to subject him to a variation in
course, but it caused such a trepidation in his mate that it was with
difficulty that she recovered the balance movement of her wings.
Reaching their cell, which was in a fissured ledge of basaltic
formation, they held another consultation and investigation, during
which my turret cone was subjected to a close examination, but the tough
silicothed filaments were too strong for removal by her feeble efforts.
Finding his strange investment inevitable, and attended with but slight
inconvenience, he, at last, with cheerful philosophy, soothed the
anxiety of his spouse with endearments, abated of their autocratic
patronizing air of superiority. This show of appreciation for his mate’s
solicitude, at once bespoke a high degree of sympathetic intelligence
attained by a union of instinctive equality. In contrasted proof of the
evident assumption, I will adduce the ants, and our neighbors of the
human species, who live in a state of concubinage, to show that sexual
gregation begets a condition of brutal selfishness in the males, causing
them to use physical strength for the reduction of their females to
serve as bond slaves of passion and labor for multitudinous production
in kind. From their continued dalliance after nightfall, I was pleased
to learn that their habits were semi-nocturnal in perceptive activity.
When they finally retired for the night to the shelter within their
cell, I suffered retributive spasms from the powerful mellific odors
that pervaded the cell, which caused protracted coughing and general
relaxation, so that in my extremity I was prompted to make my escape
into the open air, but the intense darkness and my weakness prevented
me. As my air passages became accustomed to the acrid irritation, I in
sequence suffered from mellific narcotism, and fell into a stuporic
medium between waking impressions and fantastic visions of instinct that
precede the waking dawn from sleep. These variations continued until the
bees’ emergence into the open air, in the morning, revived me. After
their matutinal salutations they rose in flight circles to their bee
line, but winged their course in an opposite direction from the
honeysuckle plot so memorable in their previous day’s experience,
probably attributing the cause of restraint to some inherent property of
the flowers.

“My elevation and swift passage through the air, reminded me, with its
bracing effect, that I had not taken food for a donsenack, so feeling at
ease I unstrapped my script and made a hearty meal, with a zest that the
words of our language will fail to express. Shortly after I had closed
my morning meal, the bees commenced their circlings in downward descent,
and ere long I discovered below, on the rocky declivity of a hillside a
growth of honeysuckles, the goal of their attraction. In the circling
support of their buzzing wings they remained suspended over the flowers
for some time, until their safety had been tested by dronivas and
humming-birds, then with caution they ventured to settle upon the
petals, and after some hesitation, the female was loaded and dispatched
with her first cargo to the cell. The male, as on the previous day,
employed his time during her absence in an investigation of the floral
resources of the hillside, with an occasional essay of his belligerent
propensities directed against humming-birds and other collectors of
sweets. This disposition, which seemed to have received an aggravated
accession, in the vigorous temerity of daring assaults, from the
restraints I had imposed, was treated with a gentle admonition to test
their directing efficacy.

“The first essay provoked a display of resistance, but without avail in
thwarting the changes I meditated, except for the production of a marked
degree of discomfort, as the tension of the filamental bonds from
opposing obstinacy caused a spasmodic action of the wings from axillary
compression. Disconcerted, after frequent trials of his voluntary powers
in opposition to my guiding mechanical appliances, he settled upon a
petal for reflection. Then, seemingly, after mature consideration, an
instinctive impulse would cause him to dart away in flight as if to test
anew his strength in controlling volition, but only to be turned back
before reaching the object of his destination. When successful, after
frequent failures, he seemed to be quite as much disturbed as with the
contrary results of his trials. I soon found in these practical essays,
that my studied calculations for his direction fell far short of the
absolute requirements of necessity and safety. In his short flights I
discovered a power of resistance that baffled my attempts to direct his
rise and descent, which was evidently independent of head and wings.
Looking backward, when making a short tack, the resisting part was made
manifest by the movements of the cartilaginous rings of the body. In
studying the changing results in controlling direction, I found that the
body acted as a rudder in flight for upward and downward inclination,
and until I could obtain its concerted action with head and wings,
instinctive volition would oppose my usurpation of its natural rights.
With the view of effecting temporary control I rove a ring with a line
attached to the four terminal quarters of its circumference, to act,
when adjusted, as a tip to the body. This I confined in place without
much difficulty, and passing the lines through corresponding guides to
the carapace reflected them through pulleys back to the cone. These
additions to my managing devices, met with no decided opposition, but
the victim kept my movements under the watchful supervision of his eyes,
but more in curiosity than in fear or anger. On the return of his mate,
an antennæ inspection was improvised for tracing the new additions, but
as their labors were quickly resumed, I interpreted their quiet
resignation as an act of submission. After the departure of his spouse
on her second homeward trip, he engaged in a flight trial to learn the
extent of the new vetoes that I had placed upon his volition
correspondence with members of his body corporate. His diminished lack
of self-control begot a vengeful desire to retrieve compensation by
inflicting retributive discomfort and stings upon the innocent. After
his test trials had convinced him, that in movement he was no longer
capable of commanding himself, but subject to a mysterious power, he
fought two rounds with dronivas, the odds being four to one in favor of
his opponents, each exceeding his weight by two thirds; after sustaining
his preëmption right to the sole occupation of the flowers with them, he
matched his vengeful speed and tactics against a score of humming-birds,
proving himself equal to his undertaking. Besides these emprises of
valor and speed, I subjected him to a test of my guiding improvements to
which he not only submitted in freedom from irritability, but seemed to
recognize the new sensations and eccentric effects as a pleasing
supplement to his involuntary powers, superseding in part the necessity
of volition. Desiring that he might become accustomed to my guiding
presence, and familiar with my person, I exposed myself as often as
possible to his own and consort’s eyes, and on their return to the cell
at nightfall, I felt certain that they had accepted me as an attached
presage for good. As in oft repeated subjection to deleterious
influences, the narcotic effluvia of the cell was far less offensive
than on the previous night.

“With the dawn of the third morning the bees rose to their line and
settled in descent upon the flowers in bloom on the vines subject to the
previous day’s levy. As if in anticipation of my intention, the usual
four cargoes were dispatched in less than an hour, then both circled
upward to the line for homeward flight, when, to their astonishment, I
turned the lead of the male to the westward. This deviation from
ancestral custom, and sequent habits, aroused the most obstinate
resistance, which after several pseudo starts succeeded in baffling my
intention, and but for the fortunate discovery of the cause, which was
the fouling of the sinister guiding line, I should have been obliged to
succumb to the instinctive obstinacy transmitted for the preservation of
formalistic routine. With hazardous determination I succeeded in
righting it, notwithstanding the increased velocity of their homeward
flight, accelerated by the instinctive impetus from the imparted zest of
their return to the line of old habits. When again subject to my
control, the course of the male was changed to a northwesterly
direction, but the female coaxingly endeavored to turn him back with the
voice of her wings, as she kept abreast in equal flight. Finding it
impossible, she reluctantly resumed her station in the rear, yielding
protestingly to his lead. At first a natural feeling deterred me from
casting a look below through fear of being surprised with giddiness, but
gradually this passed away under the exhilarating elasticity of the air,
which appeared to raise my spirits to an equality with my ambitious
aspirations. Presumptuous mortality even ventured to cast a scornful
glance upon things mundane; when lo! in advance, rising to the bee line
I discovered a meroptic bee-eater which dissolved in fear my
exultations.

“Luckily my naturalistic studies enabled me to disappoint him of his
premeditated tid-bit gratification, as I should have been included in
his bill of fare, with a vale for the improved means of locomotion I had
obtained for my people. Grateful for the presence of mind which in great
emergencies baffles instinct, I abruptly changed the course of the bee
northward. But the pursuing merop was not to be disappointed without an
extra effort to secure his prize, for he immediately tried his chances
in chase; but as he was soon distanced he gave up pursuit, still soaring
above the trees to intercept those which he expected in train, but for
once, at least, he was foiled in following the transmitted impressions
of ancestral instinct. The curved flight of the merop, even with the
advantage of superior swiftness, would have been quickly distanced by
the undeviating line of the bees’ air trail when once in advance of
their pursuer, unless retarded by the greed of an overload; of this fact
the instinct of the bird is apprised, but hunger sets at variance all
rules, and if he fails in intercepting, he often pursues. The apiaster,
after his first capture, if his prize proves to be a honey bee, builds
his nest beneath the line, for the purpose of surprising the homeward
flight of the workers when loaded with his coveted sweets. My escape
from sudden death, although easily avoided from seasonable discovery of
the danger, served as a timely warning, which kept me in careful watch
for unknown perils.

“Only a short space of time had elapsed from the start, when in advance
I discovered a beautiful and highly cultivated valley. The giga laborers
were Indians who were under white taskmasters. Passing over the valley,
which extended to the northwest as far as the eye could reach, I changed
our course to the northeast; rising to a line above the mountains two
cities opened to my view, both inclosed with walls for protection. The
largest city was built in the basin of an amphitheatre of surrounding
hills, with an opening, and corresponding gate of the city, looking out
upon the valley we had overflown. The second city was beautifully
located upon the summit of a hill, overshadowed by the spray of a large
waterfall that flowed over the brink of a precipice, which extended its
barrier for miles north and south, its perpendicular descent being only
broken by a zigzag roadway cut in its face for communication between the
two cities. The wall of circumvallation around the City of the Falls was
not fully completed, for thousands of workmen were still engaged upon
the portion inclosing the large plain that sloped from the summit in
broad expanse to the limits of the walled stream that flowed from the
basin of the falls, without the foundation of the walls, to unite again
without the cinctus gates. From the circling lash in the hands of the
taskmasters, it was easy to comprehend that the laborers were bondsmen,
their color indicating aboriginal birth.

“In homeward flight the bees were allowed to take their own course,
which, from the accelerated rapidity in the motion of their wings,
declared a nostalgic haste to enjoy the hospitalities of their sweet
home. After the morning’s labor of the bees was completed on the
succeeding day, I directed their flight over Maniculæ to discover
whether you were over anxious on my account, but as my family appeared
to be free from disquiet I again turned my bees westward for new
explorations. Alighting at midday on an island in a lake, south of the
valley discoveries of the previous day, I found it unsettled with an
animalculan race of tits, whose sole occupation seemed to be devoted to
sociable potations of a fluid that excited amicable quarrels, in which
the families engaged with wild enthusiasm, without respect to age or
infirmities. The domestic amusements were varied with cockroach racings,
worshiping, drinking, dancing, fighting, and hunting pediculas, in the
latter sport the women and children engaged with peculiar zest. In
verification of our sages demonstrations of instinctive cause and
effect, when subject to gregarious association in folds, in freedom from
the directing intelligence of Creative endowment, their bodies gave sure
indication of reactive bestiality. Disgusted with the extremes they
exhibited of wailings and vociferous jabberings, as the product of
instinct bewrayed with madness, I was glad with grateful relief when my
cleanly transport bore me again into the pure atmosphere beyond the
sound reach of the reviling pretexts of these ape libels upon Creative
intention. Assuming the privilege of a sub-lunary discoverer, I named
the island Greenpat, from the emerald beauty of its tints, and the
inhabitants Mouthpats, from their unthinking volubility, bespeaking the
unkempt scragginess of their natures.

“Having tested the ready sagacity of my transport acquisition, and
applicability for quick conveyance, I now propose to make use of it to
obtain others of its kind, with a view to propagation, as I feel certain
that it can be domesticated for mutual advantage, as both male and
female evince an increasing confidence in the controlling influence of
my presence; and of the enduring longevity of the species I feel equally
certain.”

The assemblage, at the conclusion of the narration, enthusiastically
congratulated Buzzee upon the result of his successful perseverance,
saluting him as a public benefactor, with the title of apiamaster. In
the course of a century there was not a family in Manatitla without a
pair or more of the apis isolatas, which became known in common usage as
the bee phaeton. Their introduction as locomotive facilitations
contributed greatly to extended sociability, as they were able to bear
with ease twenty giantescoes, forty mediums, or their equivalents in
tits, and we have evident reason to believe that they instinctively
enjoy their domestication with us better than in a wild state, for in
our pleasure parties they harmonize the voice vibrations of their wings
with our songs. To Buzzee’s inventive skill we are also indebted for the
imperishable combination used in building, and the preparation of our
textile fabrics.

After the discovery of the Heraclean cities, with the increase of our
people’s means of communication, they were visited daily for the purpose
of influencing the citizens to bestow more kindly treatment upon their
aboriginal benefactors. Evoce (quick perception), a giantesco, had
gained the ear of a cruel taskmaster, for the purpose of using his voice
in expostulation, when to his surprise, he distinctly heard vengeful
denunciations without the utterance of words of speech from the mouth of
the brutal auramentee. Satisfied after frequent experimental repetitions
that the enunciations were vocalized impressions heralding audited words
of speech that could be suppressed or spoken, he made known the nature
of his discovery to the Dosch and his advisers. The coincident
impression of their own thought enunciations, confirmed Evoce’s
suggestion that thought enunciation, and also instinctive mental
impressions, were vocalized by an enunciator in proximity with the ear,
and in communication with the combined organs of sense. Upon these
suggestive conclusions was founded an experimental course of
investigation, which resulted, not only in the full verification of
their deductive anticipations, but with the development of the power of
substituting extraneous impressions for adoption by the giga auramentee,
through the modulated induction of the giantesco voice to an accord with
the mood of the subject. Great care was required in the ventriloquial
modulations of the auramentor’s voice for exact correspondence with the
characteristic peculiarities of the auramentee’s; for any remarkable
deviation was sure to alarm their superstitious fears. For the
acquirement of facility in the substitution of ideas and thoughts, it
was necessary to obtain humoristic ease in the detail expression of
idiomatic phrase peculiar to the auramentee’s use of language. With the
naturally good, we were soon able, with the mutual incitement of
novelty, to evoke and cultivate the germ of pity, while with the
instinctively bad our efforts served to arouse superstitious fears for
the negative advancement of our object, through retributive
apprehensions of vengeance in return for their cruelties. These, with
strange inconsistency, caused sacrificial oblations, with deputized
prayers, to be offered in commutation for the continued gratification of
their evil habits and passions. Yet, with all the perversity of ruling
instinct we have been able to accomplish much good through the means of
thought substitution with your race.




                              CHAPTER XIV.


Having given you, by quotation from our chroniclers, a synoptical view
of two important discoveries which facilitated our communication with
your race, I will now, continued the Dosch, refer you to your own
impressions, and the eccentricities of the uninitiated from thought
substitution, for the clear demonstration of our auramental powers. Or
if, in review, you can recall examples of instinctive spiritual
manifestations, you will be able to judge of our method in dealing with
the instinctively stupid, partly with hopes of reflecting the extremes
of absurdity, and in sub-part for our humorous gratification in tracing
the commotional hubbub of selfish instinct in its search for the means
of saving grace to rescue folly from its own attaint. You will soon be
able to judge of the limits that we are confined to in auramentation.
With the instinctively evil, our efforts excite fear and ritualistic
prayers for propitiation, and exorcism of supposed inimical agencies
foreign to self. But with the good we are able to impart happy
encouragement. Selfish excess, in all of its forms, bespeaks a material
agency and end, and as this is the god of realization with the
gregarious democracy of the gigas, the influence of our auramental
efforts—if their source was known—would be denounced with bell and book,
as heretically pedantic and puritanical. But goodness imparts an animus
joy that affords in life tangible impressions of immortality.

We now will pass to our fourth important epoch, noted for the personal
introduction of the Dosch Giganteo to Indegatus, Prætor of the present
City of the Falls. In the process of rehearsal we shall allude to the
third or falcon era.

Indegatus, Prætor of New Heraclea or more properly Heraclea of the
Falls, was a man of indefatigable energy, and at the period of
Giganteo’s introduction had just rescued the city from great peril. The
peril from the besiegers was in fact less dangerous than the factious
dissensions of the populace within the city walls. Aware that idleness
was the mother of envy and turmoil, he had caused the latifundium to be
divided into garden plots apportioned to the size of each family, for
the cultivation of edible roots and cereals. While engaged with his two
sons, Unipho and Gnipho, in the cultivation of their land, a bee
alighted on the father’s shoulder, attracting his attention from the
singularity of its appearance and fearless confidence. Apparently
satisfied with the attention it had received it flew to a neighboring
flower occupied by a companion. Shortly after he felt a sharp sting on
the back of his hand; a quick glance discovered a speck variegated with
dark and shining particles, which he was about to brush away, supposing
it to be an insect; when something peculiar in its movements attracted a
more minute inspection, this resulted in the recognition of a little
body possessing the dressed outline of the human form. Startled with
superstitious fear from an apparition so manifestly supernal, he called
his sons that their stronger eyes might confirm or dispel the impression
of his more attenuated sight. After an inspection of a few seconds they
burst into a merry peal of laughter, exclaiming in a breath, “It’s a
little man in Heraclean armor and sagum, flourishing his sword and spear
as if he wished us to understand his signs!”

“My sons,” urged the father with anxious fears, “give more reverend
heed! He appears in a guise that betokens admonition from the regions of
the nether world. Give earnest attention to his direction that the
import of his visit may be revealed.”

_Gnipho._ “The little stranger points to one of my ears as if he wished
to be admitted to a hearing?”

_Indegatus._ “My son, must I admonish you a second time to be more
reverend in speech when addressing a being bearing tidings, you know not
from whom, or from whence?”

_Gnipho._ “You have advised us, father, to follow the example of our
superiors, and this stranger phantom appears to be in no serious mood,
for he laughs at your fears. But I will admit him to an audience, that
he may declare the object of his visit!”

_Indegatus._ “Presume not to take advantage of his levity, for as you
are well instructed, and know that when I advised, it was for your
dealings with mortality?”

_Gnipho._ “Now he laughs outright, and my ear resounds with his mirth,
as if filled with the infantile chirping of a joyous cricket. But now he
speaks!”

_Indegatus._ “Listen?”

_Gnipho._ “Yes father. He asks if I can hear him distinctly.”

_Indegatus._ “Then in virtue of my office as prætor and augur, I will
address him. Speak Nuntius: What tidings bear you from the spirit world?
and from whose realm do you come in this disguise?”

_Gnipho._ “Again I hear his small voice in the chuckling check of
merriment, as if he would fain speak in reply.”

_Indegatus._ “Then listen, my child, to the message he bears? It surely
cannot presage ill if he is in merry mood!”

_Gnipho._ (Listening.) “He says he is not a spirit, but of mortal birth,
like ourselves. But I will repeat his own words. ‘Say to your father,
that I have been long acquainted with his goodness, and desire to
relieve his anxiety for the self-imposed misery of his people. Also to
render him other efficient aid in a small way!’”

_Indegatus._ “Ask him, with grateful thanks, his name, and from whence
he came?”

_Gnipho._ (Laughing.) “He says his name is Giganteo, the Dosch or
patriarch of the Manatitlans, a race of animalculans whose country lies
six hundred stadia to the southeast of the deserted city of Heraclea.”

_Indegatus._ “Ask him how he proposes to help us?”

_Gnipho._ “He says by adding to your knowledge, in a privileged way that
enables the small to help the great! He expresses a wish for us to
retire with him to the parapet steps of the northern wall, where we
shall be comparatively free from the shrill vibrations of the cicada’s
winged notes.”

_Indegatus._ “We will move as he directs.”

_Gnipho._ “Now that we have complied with his request, he charges me to
listen, and treasure all that I hear, that I may repeat it to you.”

_Indegatus._ “We will keep silence that your attention may not be
distracted.”

After an hour’s close attention, Gnipho rehearsed to his father and
brother, The Admonitory Request of Giganteo, Dosch of Manatitla. “Your
ancestors of old Heraclea trained falcons for hunting, and through their
borrowed use the Manatitlans obtained a knowledge of giga and
animalculan nations beyond the ocean. We wished to recompense the
service by imparting the source of our happiness to the people of
Heraclea in return. But tyrannous ingratitude had so blunted
affectionate sympathy, that your immediate ancestors alone listened to
our warnings. But even they would have shared the common fate, if we had
not found among the slaves those capable of judging between the good and
evil. The majority of the enslaved were as relentless, as the doomed
were blind to their impending fate. They had determined that none of
their hated oppressors of either city should be spared; but the
Manatitlans through the same means that I propose to offer for your aid,
foiled the deadly intention of the slaves. While the old Heracleans were
reveling in the height of their prosperity, falconry, as with all the
pontine races coeval with their transatlantic progenitors, was their
favorite pastime. Aeriolus, a worthy successor of Buzzee, visited the
mews of old Heraclea, and with equally well devised skill in
preparation, conceived the idea of utilizing the swift flight of the
falcons and powers of abstinent endurance for crossing the ocean, the
shores of which he had visited with the limited powers of the bee
volant. Adventuring, with associate volantaphs, trials for their control
in hunting, he soon perfected guiding attachments as efficient for
directing their movements in flight as those devised for the bee.
Selecting the swiftest and strongest he gradually accustomed them to
long sustained flights over the ocean, insuring their welcome back to
the mews by increased docility—under direction—to the will and lures of
the falconer, when in the field. The anticipated difficulties from
opposing wind currents, and means of obtaining food sustenance, and
disposing of it while in flight, had been successfully overcome by
prolonged observations verified with tests. Food was obtained by
directing the falcons’ attention to flying fish as objects of prey,
which, with parachute aid, they were able, after a little practice under
the stimulus of hunger, to devour in mid air.

“In memorial of his success Aeriolus gives in testimony the transcribed
after observation. ‘The transition from meat to fish, for a “fasting”
flight of instinct, was adopted with far greater avidity than in human
acts of ritualistic conformity to mythical injunctions, which we have
seen practiced by the sectarian devotees to creeds, as negative
compensations for over indulgence of the carnal affections.’

“When the arrangements of Aeriolus were fully perfected, he and thirty
associates, with their wives, bade a hopeful farewell to the people of
Manatitla, and started from the lochia (plaza) of Maniculæ upon their
adventurous air voyage of discovery, with a leading falcon and three
followers. Studying to aid the falcons by every possible means they, to
their joyful surprise, discovered land on the morning of the fourth day
from the start, and, at an early hour thereafter, alighted upon the
lofty peak of an island mountain, since known as the Corcovado, a
mountain summit of Corvo, one of the Azorean Isles. After regaling the
falcons in relief from their lenten diet, they, of their own accord,
continued their flight to the mainland. Our joy was much depressed,
while passing over the beautiful land scenes, by the fierce cries of
giga hosts engaged in battle encounter. In our course eastward, to a
country of colored races resembling the aboriginals of our own, not a
day passed without our forced observation of a battle scene, with fields
and smoking ruins that bespoke the devastation of warful rage.

“Sick and despairing from the constant recurrence of murderous acts of
despoliation, we at last reached, in returning, a cluster of islands in
the western ocean to the northward of our point of arrival. On the
largest island we found a hardy species of falcon, and, with the lure of
our own, obtained four. After a few days’ training of our transport
addition we returned to the island where we first landed. Anxious to
return to our people, and the cheering welcome of loving affection, we
only tarried upon the island a sufficient time to accustom our newly
acquired birds to devour their food while sustained by the parachute and
their wings in mid-rest. Starting, homeward bound, on the morning of the
sixtieth sun from the date of our departure from Maniculæ, we reached it
again on the third day with the first notes of the evening anthem of
thanksgiving, in which we gratefully joined in our descent to perch.

“Some days were occupied in the public rehearsal of the events and
discoveries transpiring in the progress of our voyage; the resulting
issue proving a source of congratulation, nathless, our disappointment
from the unfavorable prospect afforded for an affectionate reception by
the animalculan residents of the many countries over which we passed,
from the effect of giga example. After many repetitions of the voyage,
it was decided that colonization in the chief cities of Europe and Asia
offered the only means for the effectual regeneration of the animalculan
races for a happy appreciation of our exampled resources of loving
affection. When the proposition for colonistic volunteers was proclaimed
it received such a general sympathetic prompting of affectionate
obligation, that every Manatitlan held himself and family in readiness
for the service. As it was necessary, for self-defense, to have a
majority of giantescoes and mediums, to overawe treacherous designs, the
required number for colonizing Rome, Constantinople, and Jerusalem, were
obtained by lot. When, on the eve of departure, the Dosch advised them
to live apart from the natives of the cities, and in self dependence
upon their own exertions for support; but to receive all healthy
children of the required age, placed at their disposal for the
Manatitlan term of education. The emigrants numbered among their
volunteers representatives of all the mechanical branches of artisan
labor, and especially those well instructed in the departments of
indestructible house building and defensible vestments. So that little
fear was entertained for their safety, as they could with ease repel the
largest armies of tits that could be mustered. But their chief reliance
was upon a sturdy adherence to their native habits and customs, yet ever
open for the reciprocation of affectionate goodness. They were also
admonished to make all possible application for the speedy acquisition
of lingual idioms spoken in the different countries of their sojourn for
future availment. Also, whenever favorable opportunity offered for the
cultivation of giga goodness, to use their privilege of auramentation
and thought substitution for encouragement and fruition. These general
directions were improvised more for encouragement than from actual
knowledge of the process best adapted for the controversion of habits
and customs opposed to affectionate association and self-government.

“The first appearance of the Manatitlans in the cities of their
destination attracted universal awe and curiosity on the part of the
resident animalculan tits; for but few of the natives reached in stature
the medium size. Their sudden and mysterious advent, gigantic size,
quiet demeanor, and the great affection that they manifested towards
each other, and in all the relations of life, proved a source of emulous
wonder and admiration with the good, and a rankling, envious source of
disdain to the evil minded.

“Selecting their sites for residence from the advantages of
inaccessibility to giga approach, arable soil, and capabilities for
irrigation, their habitations were quickly constructed, with a cleanly
elegance of adornment that added a new element of wonder to the lazy
imaginations of instinct, in the superstitious belief that they were
visitors under the patronage of divine agency. With these introductory
advantages, which the colonists disclaimed to be other than those within
the reach of all grades of mortality, which their appearance and
vocation were intended to impart, the schools were organized, and
flooded to overflowing with applications for admission. The monthly
visitations of the children’s parents confirmed the belief that mission
was under the special direction of the Godhead.

“The unselfish warmth of their children’s affection opened to their view
a source of realized happiness that truly bespoke the impressions of
immortality, from the continued joy imparted in anticipation of renewal.
The reputation of our advent, from the representative example of our
neophytes, soon extended our influence to remote animalculan
dependencies, so that the extension of our colonistic schools well nigh
drained Manatitla of its effective resources of vitality. In the course
of a few centuries, dating from the Manatitlan colonistic advent in the
countries of the eastern continent, the system of education introduced
had been generally adopted, under our supervision, by the animalculan
races; notwithstanding the instinctive opposition of the chivalric
portion, who followed the ancestral prestige derived from the preferred
imitation of giga military school organizations, designed for the
classical attraction of the senses with tinsel display, and ‘glorious’
din of martial music.

“Meanwhile your Heraclean ancestors had completed their third wall of
circumvallation, and had extended their predatory excursions to the
nether ocean beyond the dominions of the Yunka Machicas (Alta Peruvians)
into those under the rule of Mauna Chusoes (children of the sun), whose
women were esteemed very beautiful, being compared by a Heraclean
chronicler of the period, ‘to all that was lovely in person, with a
complexion that blended upon a surface of white, the reflected rays of
burnished copper and gold.’ This comparison conveys the rich expression
of metallic voluptuousness so much coveted by your Roman ancestry. These
ravishing toys of passion heralded the end. Your immediate ancestors had
obtained an asylum in your present City of the Falls. ‘The end came and
with it our hopes of communication with our colonies beyond the ocean.’

“Although aware of the approaching catastrophe, we had supposed the
falcons would be spared, but the Indians included everything living in
the sum of their hatred that had contributed in any way to the
oppressive pleasures of their taskmasters, unfortunately including all
but eight of the falcons in the massacre, sacrificing with them some of
our best volantaphs. The eight were employed in transporting our
Mouthpat neighbors to Rome, Gaul, and Iberian Asturias; but it was hard
to keep in advance of their reproductive tendencies with so small a
fleet.

“There was, however, a slight improvement in getting rid of the old
stock, but the Dosch little thought of the possible injurious effect the
Mouthpats were likely to exert in retarding the progressive prosperity
of our colonists. But when, in the course of a few years they were
deprived of their last falcon, the Manatitlans were led by the
troublesome dispositions of their neighbors to reflect upon the evil
ingraft they had imposed upon the labors of their people abroad. This
source of anxiety has been so greatly magnified in the course of
centuries which have passed since the loss of our last falcon, that, in
our distress, we now appeal to your suffering sympathies for aid in
reclaiming those of the descendants of our carrier breed who have, from
ancestral habits of association with your race, made their eryemews
within the circuit of your cinctus walls. In like return, when your sons
and daughters have redeemed for us the means of more safe and long
sustained flight, we shall be better able to render you service against
your enemies.”

_Indegatus._ “I have listened to my son’s transmission of your request,
and we will thankfully comply with your desire!”

_Giganteo._ “That you may be enabled to effect the good I contemplate,
it will be necessary for you to restrict your confidence to those of
your family who have arrived at the understanding age of discretion. For
with your people’s knowledge of our existence and communication with
you, our efforts would be rendered void.”

_Indegatus._ “We can readily understand the many ways in which its
publicity would compromise your endeavors to render us aid, and you can
rely upon our watchful discretion and submission to your direction. But
I would wish to be resolved upon a subject all important for the
fulfillment of our higher responsibility? Your discursive narration of
events in your locomotive attainments, has implied a reliance upon a
higher source of aid than our gods. It would appear that you claim for
creation a sole Creator, who has bestowed upon mankind a duality,
compounded of instinct for the support and prompting of material
manifestations of the body, with an affectionate guide in readiness for
an alliance to perfect individuality for a happy earthly initiation of
the animus into the blissful current of immortality? This has reflected
through the darkness of our customary usages a path of light, most
cheering in prospect of immortality! Do you deny the existence of Gods
whose favors are to be propitiated with acceptable prayers and
sacrifices?”

_Giganteo._ “We have within ourselves all sufficient evidence of a
supreme Creator, who has created mankind with a privileged superiority
from an alliance with affectionate purity and goodness. A knowledge of
this optional endowment we have derived from its practical observance in
exampled association, founded upon an educated preference above, and for
the affectionate direction of our bodies self-sustaining instincts. Of
our method of education, which adapts the body’s instincts for the
allied entertainment of animus purity and goodness for affectionate
anticipations of immortality, we will practically instruct you in season
for adoption.”

_Indegatus._ “Then you not only deny the existence of our Gods, but
erect an altar within the body for the sacrifice of animal passions, in
purification for the reception of a proffered alliance with affectionate
goodness?”

_Giganteo._ “Your quick comprehension surprises me! It will, however,
lead you to a ready appreciation of our system of education for insuring
allied reciprocation.”

_Indegatus._ “The cause of my augur sight is that my parents offered
with example a happy impression of attainments in kind with those you
describe. But as the hour of reflection approaches I will ask you to
join us, that you may be refreshed, for the continuation of your
suggestive history, with its application to our needs under the
direction of your people!”

_Giganteo._ “Gratias, for your kind proffer! But I must not allow my
appetite to act the parasite in your famishing need. My wife occupies
the howdah of the phaeton, and has brought at least a month’s provision,
so that in our plenty we are better able to share with you, and I
should, at least in the form of courtesy, have asked you to test
Leoptilea’s skill in the culinary art; for I can assure you, she has an
excellent reputation in the art of appetizing food combinations.”

Gnipho and his brother, with all their restraining efforts, could not
refrain from a hearty outburst of merriment at this courteous sally of
the Dosch, whose commissary stores for a month’s supply for himself,
wife, companions, and volantaphs, were the scarcely perceptible burden
of a bee. Indegatus catching the infection, the trio startled the
hereditary silence of the latifundium with the unusual echoes of jocund
laughter, causing the distant laborers to suspend their occupations in
wondering surprise at the vent of emotions which had been so long
suppressed with the rule of discontent and anxiety. The cause of this
ebullition lent his mitey chirrup to swell the chorus, and incite its
continuance with Gnipho. Changing to the ear of Indegatus after the more
urgent emotions had subsided, the Dosch complimented him for his well
preserved sympathetic mirthful tones of voice, expressing in
commendation his surprise that the long disuse of mirth provocatives had
not caused the resonance of his intonations to become dry and wheezy.
Then, in continuation, he said, “Now that I have gained your kindly
appreciation seasoned with the genial sympathy of a hearty laugh, I will
rejoin my family while you are absent with yours during the heat of
noontide.”




                              CHAPTER XV.


While Gnipho was rehearsing the wonders of his marvelous interview with
the Dosch of Manatitla, to his mother and sisters, as he was about
closing he became suddenly silent, with his eyes drawn attentively to
his right ear. The strabismic impulse startled his mother and sisters,
but a bright smile on Gnipho’s face relieved their fears. In a few
seconds he held out his hand, and presented, with an introduction, the
Dosch and his wife, with their companions. When female curiosity had
subsided the Doschessa intimated her desire to hold an auramental
interview with the eldest daughter! Her compliance was accompanied with
evidences of trepidation, but after a few minutes these subsided giving
place to an expression of vivacious interest, indicating a discussion of
matters pertaining to female economy. The Dosch observing these symptoms
of female confluency, reminded the prætor that the confidence of the sex
was formalistic, and never free in the presence of males! Acting upon
this hint Indegatus with the Dosch, Gnipho, and brother withdrew to the
thalmus auditorium. The renewed interview of the Dosch with Indegatus
and sons was opened by Gnipho, who petitioned his father, “May I
question the Dosch to obtain further knowledge of this power of self
control? It appears so natural and free from the delusions of our
worship, in which we are constantly supplicating for what we neglect to
obtain from our own endowed resources, it must insure happy contentment
in life, and as he says, a pro-realizing foretaste of immortality.
Indeed, father, I have before felt that there was within my control a
peaceful joy that would serve as a shield from self-deception and the
wiles of hypocrisy, which, in grateful thankfulness, I have wished to
impart for others’ benefit.”

_Indegatus._ “My son, I have looked back with reverence upon the
ceremonial forms of worship practiced by our ancestors, relying upon
their efficacy without questioning the authenticity of their divine
origin. Even on the appearance of the Dosch, as a stranger, in a form so
questionable, and in accordance with my preconceived ideas of
disembodied spirits, I did not doubt but that he was a nuncio of some
special admonition, in answer to my supplications for aid in controlling
the disaffected Heracleans, who have so greatly increased the misery of
our position. But since he has convinced us that he is in reality a
diminutive impersonation of our mortality, and has spoken so directly to
our understanding, my eyes have been opened to the profane delusions of
our long practiced ritualistic rites, addressed from and to an
instinctive void, in evasion of our privileged endowment of goodness,
which should direct our grateful thanksgivings to the Supreme Creator.
We are surrounded with sad realities, which require self reliance for
their correction, and from the source of goodness we can alone hope for
directing aid. The discourse of the Dosch harmonizes with a host of new
thoughts, which convict me, from past admonitions, of willful
infatuation and stupidity in avoiding the animus impressions of my
better nature. In the sincerity of truthful surprise, we can now look
forward, my sons, with the confident hope of inaugurating for future
generations a source of happiness that will reflect the current rays of
immortality. But we should address our grateful emotions to the Dosch,
who has interested himself for the redemption of our race from selfish
infatuation.”

_Giganteo._ “I must again express my astonishment for the apt perception
you have shown in discovering the means premised for rendering the
Heracleans amenable to self control, and offer grateful acknowledgments
to ancestral auramentors for the presage they bestowed for the easy
enhancement of my success. The volantaphs will now describe to Gnipho
and his brother the position where the nest mews of the falcons can be
found, and when transferred to those in the house adjoining the one you
occupy, you will receive the necessary instruction for rendering them
serviceable.”

After a few quotations from the old volantaphs with reference to the
treatment and training of eyasses they returned to the apartment where
the Doschessa and her companions were entertained by the family of the
prætor. The mother and daughters were so deeply engaged in curious
inquiries that the return of her husband and sons remained for some time
unnoticed. When listening had become tedious to the Dosch, he requested
Gnipho to congratulate his mother and sisters upon their freedom from
awe in conversing with disembodied spirits, as their hoarseness gave
evidence of a busy, if not a clear, occupation; which, from the sequel
they had been privileged to hear, seemed to be devoted to the worship of
a doubtful divinity. The mother replied, that they had been taught that
appearances were deceptive, and he could have but little reason to
wonder, from his own and people’s extraordinary size, if first
impressions seemed to verify the adage in a most remarkable way.
Especially when they reflected that the whole race of Manatitlans,
consolidated, would but little exceed in size a single Heraclean. “But
the moment we became accustomed to the pipeleo voices of your wives, and
could understand what they said, why bless you, we knew at once they
were mortal women, for every word and accent of their tongues bespoke
the nature of our sex, and we acknowledged without thinking the reality
of their minute personalities. But then, they expressed themselves so
wisely in the unity of their affection, that we again doubted; for it
appeared so far beyond the reach of mortal attainment, in the power and
reciprocation of individual control, that we felt within ourselves the
impossibility of a near approach to their sympathies in genial merit.
But quickly perceiving our new source of regretful dismay, they
described to us how they had been educated, and what was proposed for
the benefit of our people; so we were consoled that the difference in
attainment was only in the degree of perfection, which we should realize
in progressive ratio from the grateful reciprocation of future
generations. Our children appreciate the advantages, and are determined
to act in consonance with your directions, but we cannot hope for a near
approach to a love as disinterested as your people’s, who have never
known the misery entailed from the ranklings of envious detraction. If
the impression you wish to make on those of our citizens who are
hardened in their conspirations for misrule, prove successful, although,
for the time being, it ministers for good through the superstitious
vagaries of their perverse blindness, we will bless you in their behalf
for the legacy of affection that will return to them through their
children’s dutiful love. Indeed, they will be ignorantly grateful, that
your people made them subserve as bridges for the safe passage of their
children over the slough of accumulations that flow from the sewerage
gratifications of sensuality. Yesterday, we worshiped, with them, gods
of man’s creation, bearing the kindred impress of decay, and, with our
authority, would have punished with death those subject to a defection
like our own of to-day. Yet, we have often been led, from the exampled
enactments of our parents, to question the happiness of a heaven where
the aggravating fluctuations of our earthly associations would be
continued. For, with even less faith than my husband, I could not
realize the wisdom of a divine economy that designed, in defiance of
original intention, to elevate brute mortality, in human shape, to the
privileges of purity self-refused by earthly election. To our great
relief, you have resolved this trying source of perplexity conformably
with our wished-for reverence, sanctioned from an endowment of purity.
Thankful to the source of our enlightened preservation, we can now
clearly discern, through Creative indications, the path to immortality,
purified from the adventurous impositions of superstitious instinct.
Grateful that the realizing perfection, in the increase of attainment,
will be reflected back from generation to generation, in recompense for
the interest of our indebtedness to you, we now proffer it, with the
involving title it confers of reducing past and future to present
embodiment.”

_Giganteo._ (In whispered enthusiasm to Gnipho.) “Your mother is an
oracle of giga understanding, and the wisdom of her responses has proved
an heirloom to her children which should cause you to be ever grateful
with thankful manifestations in songs of praise to the Supreme Source of
all good.”

_Gnipho._ (In enunciated thought) “We are truly grateful, and love her
beyond expression.”

Here Gnipho raised his hand impulsively to his ear, before thought, from
loving engrossment, could check the movement from the impression of
cause.

_Giganteo._ “Pardon me! In my nervous desire to reach the tragus, that I
might witness the expression of your mother’s face as my wife imparted
your testimony for the increase of her joy, I trusted my whole weight,
with the impetus of a catch, to one of the vibbrilæ in a tender portion
of your ear. The twinge of pain I caused was well repaid with the glance
I caught of the radiant joy that suffused her face.”

Gnipho laughingly explained the cause of his sudden grimace, cautioning
his mother to be more guarded in exciting the admiration of her guests
while they were tenants of others’ ears! Before she could reply a number
of the leading conspirators, with others of the disaffected, called with
terror-stricken faces, imploring Gnipho, who received them in the
audience chamber, to intercede with his father for their forgiveness.
Gnipho from auramental dictation replied: “My father will receive your
acknowledgments of treasonable designs against your own happy
preservation in the temple fora when overshadowed in the sun’s decline
from the brink of the falls!” With “repentant” fear and its prompted
“sorrow” they humbled themselves with submissive servility, beseeching
the son to present to his father their humble duty, with the hope that
he would forgive their past transgressions. Gnipho promised that he
would deliver their message to his father, with the assurance of his
forgiveness, if in token of their sincerity they would endeavor to
controvert the injury they had inflicted upon the community by casting a
suspicion upon the integrity of his family, when, as they were well
aware, his family had been devoted to the public welfare. They departed,
upon receiving this admonition, giving voice to those abject terms of
submission, common to democratic expression when detected in acts of
base ingratitude. This interview, with others that followed in quick
succession, gave evidence that the promised leaven of Manatitlan aid was
working, which caused the prætor’s family to express in the warmest
terms their grateful admiration. After a few weeks, employment of
Manatitlan talent in the revived art of auramental thought-substitution,
with the addenda revelation of secrets in embryo, from presumed
miraculous intervention of divine power exercised through the prætor,
the citizens, without exception, were brought into subjection to his
direction.

This led to the immediate inauguration of the Manatitlan system of
education. The transformation of the temples of the foræ, for the
reception of the children, inspired a feeling of instinctive awe from
the audacity of the undertaking, which was heightened by the humorous
devisements of auramentation practiced by the volantaphs engaged in
directing the education of the brothers and sisters in the art of
falconry. With the completion of the temples for the reception of the
children, the families of the prætor’s nearest relatives and adherents
supplied the schools with teachers and censors, and in a few years all
the citizens became warm supporters of the new system, fully impressed
with its manifold benefactions from an increase in affectionate
confidence. The children of Indegatus soon became proficients in the
successful training of falcons, and were then able to place a large
fleet of birds at the disposal of their benefactors. Since the time of
Indegatus, the daughters of the prætors have assumed the charge of the
mews as an hereditary heirloom.

                  *       *       *       *       *

At this stage of the historical relation M. Hollydorf, with the
suggestive aid of the Dosch, completed his summary of the events that
had transpired from the commencement of their river explorations to
date, which was addressed to the secretary of the R. H. B. Society.
Afterwards, Mr. Welson, with the same aid, directed letters of inquiry
to his “friend” M. Baudois, a French scientific gentleman, resident
correspondent of the R. H. B. A. of Paris, at Montevideo, who employed
his time in fishing, for the classification of the inhabitants of the La
Plata estuary, with the intention of comparing them with the fishes of
the Mediterranean Sea, to determine the migratory tendencies effected by
variations in the current monsoon, to and from the Strait of Gibraltar.
He had also traced the glacial indications of the neighborhood, in
search of transition tracks of rocks in the diluvial currents of the
prehistoric periods of the earth’s immersion, before its surface
extension regulated with its axis movements, the winds, and tides. He
wrote a second letter, of like import, to Don Pedro Garcia of Buenos
Ayres, an antiquarian of note, expressing a desire for his coöperation
with M. Baudois for elucidating the probable origin of the Kyronese; and
in the collection of all available collateral evidence for
substantiating the approximate period of the Heracleans’ advent upon the
Mauna Luna shore (American); urging him to separate and classify his
proofs so that there might be no Mandevillian interweaving of facts with
traditions and conjecture, as they were intended for Mr. Dow’s use in
his elaboration of Heraclean history. With the desire expressed for
their aid in behalf of Mr. Dow’s undertaking, he did not forget to
advise them of the essential advantages he had derived from the
discovery of the representative remnants of humanity descended from
castaway exiles of the eastern continent. In illustration of the effect
produced he described, for the benefit of Don Pedro’s family, the
impression of Correliana Adinope’s presence upon the wife of one the
Vermejo chiefs, who was of Spanish birth, having been kidnapped in
girlhood from the settlement of Amelcoy.

“You, and yours, will become more perfectly impressed with the
comparative effect produced upon me from intercourse with the
Heracleans, under Manatitlan direction, by repeating, in your own
language, the testimony of a mother of your own race who has been
subjected to the wifely use of a savage chief of the Vermejo tribe since
her abduction at the age of twelve years. ‘Ay moi!’ she exclaimed, after
a visit from the Heraclean maiden we rescued. ‘When Correliana comes
there is something new and good in my body that comes forth to meet her,
for I feel no longer like myself, I am so happy. Then I talk to her in a
way quite unknown to myself; ay me, how placid my heart grows with the
light of her presence, and love, which makes me feel and forget how much
I have lost. But when she goes away the darkness returns, and I am a
beast again; then my children ask wonderingly. “Mamma what makes you so
good when she comes, and then scold so badly when the men come back?” I
try to tell them of the light that comes with her, and the darkness that
my people bring to put out the light of my love; for when the hombres
talk the good leaves me, and feel that I am lodo again. If she could
always be with me, what a source of joy I could be for my children. Yet,
she says, that my children, who are nurslings, will be permitted, by
their fathers, to attend the Heraclean schools, to learn how to comfort
me when I am old, with a love like hers. If this should come to pass,
what love there will be in store for me? But we are not like you!’

“With my comforting assurance, that her children, if intrusted to the
charge of the Heracleans before they became accustomed to the ways of
her people, would be taught by exampled association the same soothing
sympathy that had proved so grateful from its influence imparted by
Correliana, she anxiously asked, after a few moments of thoughtful
meditation, whether her children would not love their teachers better
than their mother, for their goodness was constant in its brightness,
and prefer to live with them to her neglect? When I was able to make her
understand that the object of the school was to encourage an undying
love in children for all that was good in their parents, so that its
brightness would extend with increased strength beyond the present life,
her mind became enraptured with the thought of increasing her own worth
to merit the fulfillment of my promise.”




                              CHAPTER XVI.


During the interim of letter writing in readiness for the anticipated
opening of courier communication with St. Lucia and Anelcoy, Captain
Greenwood had advised Correliana of his wish that the padre and sailors
Jack and Bill should meet the steamer at the latter place. His despatch
urged haste, as he was about to leave the gold spit, which they were
then working; its deposits had become nearly exhausted. When she made
the wishes of the captain known, Abdul Nycaster, the son of the
mayorong, volunteered to act as courier under the conduct of a party of
lower river Indians. These Indians, called by the Mestizoes, Vermojotes,
ranked next to those of the upper valleys in trustworthy intelligence,
so that no fears were entertained for the safety of those intrusted to
their care.

A few mornings after the despatch of the courier and his party, the
Dosch resumed the historical thread of his narration.

                  *       *       *       *       *

You can well imagine, the chronicler exclaims, the enthusiastic
admiration of the Prætor Indegatus’s children for the Manatitlans, when
they saw the anxious expression of their parents’ faces give place to an
unspeakable joy, which imparted its radiance alike to his former
adherents and foes. In evidence of their grateful sincerity they were
unremitting in their endeavors to perfect themselves for the duties of
censors and teachers, as well as in the more direct returns of material
aid to their benefactors’ affections, from their success in raising and
training falcons, which promised the means for the speedy accomplishment
of a reunion with colonistic correlatives. A year and a half had
scarcely passed before the volantaphs were able to extend their flights
a day and a third’s distance in stretch over the ocean, for their own
instruction in the management of the birds free from exhausting
irritation, as well as to accustom them to devour their food while
sustained with parachute and outstretched wings. The volantaphs, while
disengaged from the active duties of their profession, kept the
democratic instincts of the Heracleans in mindful dread of harboring
thoughts of disaffection, held in legacy from hypocrisy, the
progenitorial mother of hatred and misrule, as they had been taught,
with lessons of chagrin, that their thoughts were no longer their own.
The result of this knowledge enforced sincerity, which begat cheerful
confidence in association, an effect that soon became manifest to the
besiegers. Elasticity of thought, unprejudiced by suspicion, soon
imparted its health-giving impression to the movements of the body, and
action of the senses, directing them to the cultivation of useful
occupations devoted to the common welfare. This freedom, in surcease
from the treacherous enactments of suspicion, produced symptoms of
reviving alacrity in the unanimity of action, which the savages detected
from their perch on the brink of the falls’ precipice, with puzzled
surprise, evinced by the changing increase of numbers, and curious gaze
of the watchers. The first practical use made of the falcons had been
devoted to watching the Indians to learn their projected intentions,
with the purpose of defeating them by anticipation without loss to the
Heracleans. The unaccountable improvement in the condition and
cordiality of the citizens made the savages more wary and watchful. The
river savages, suspicious of the valley Indians, kept a large body of
their number constantly before the gates to prevent treachery. From
couriers, which had been sent to the most distant of the river tribes,
it was evident that some new and more energetic scheme was in progress
to bring the siege to a close. While the valley harvesting was in
progress, the volantaphs had observed long trains of loaded llamas
proceeding up the Lepula and Vermejo valleys, and their destination was
traced to a cave in the basaltic continuation of the falls’ precipice,
about a mile to the north of the city. Giganteo explored the cave, and
found that it contained extensive stores of dried fish, squillated
meats, (hardened by the combined action of heat, pressure, and smoke),
corn and maize parched, ready for grinding, in preparation for their
favorite murmiel, also dried fruits in abundance. As the extent of the
hoard foreboded large auxiliary accessions he was alarmed, and only
thought of adding to the defenses of the city. While in flight around
the city to examine if there was in the walls an accessible foothold for
the savages, an accidental discovery suggested the idea of appropriating
the stores of the cave for the benefit of the Heracleans. Satisfied that
the moats and walls were free from adventitious aids of encouragement
for savage emprise, his attention was attracted by a jetty of basaltic
rock that projected into the northern basin of the falls from the
outward shore. Measuring its distance from the terminus of the wall and
base of the precipice, he found that the space would admit of the
circuit swing of a bridge sufficiently long for secure lodgment against
the jetty. His brother, an engineer of ability, had a model of a bridge
with the required measurements prepared for the prætor with a
descriptive statement of its object. Great was the joy of the prætor’s
family when this projected source of relief was explained with the
assurance of its working practicability, which promised to render
nugatory the designs of the leaguers, by depriving them of their ready
means of subsistence, thereby provoking suspicion of treachery, with the
probable result of disruption and dispersion. The prætor immediately
paid a visit to this loophole of promised good fortune, accompanied by
the most skillful Heraclean artisans, who declared, after consulting the
measurements, that with the floating material the plan was not only
feasible, but the bridge could be quickly constructed. The Dosch
recommended that the northern crematorial temple should be dismantled,
as its timbers were well suited in length and seasoned lightness for the
purpose. But this proposed act of desecration created a momentary
impression of dismay in the mind of Indegatus, to which was added his
fears of reviving the citizens’ superstitious prejudices, as it would be
held as an open defiance of the avenging gods. The Dosch appeased his
misgivings, with the promise of anticipating religious objections. This
was accomplished, but it required skillful substitution of thought,
notwithstanding the prospect of plenty offered in the event of success.
The labor imposed, in the quick execution of the work, aided in subduing
the conjurations of danger, while the veil of mist rising from the spray
of the waterfall effectually screened from the eyes of the Indian
sentinels the work in progress.

By the time the valley Indians had gathered and garnered their crops,
adding their quota to the stores of the cave, the bridge was launched
for trial, and from the buoyancy of the timber was found to be portably
light and strong, so that in reversed movement against the current it
could be easily managed. Gnipho was its sole occupant in trial essay,
guiding with a rope the safe lodgment of its distal extremity against
the jetty. When well tested in all of its working movements it was drawn
back with comparative ease; but not before the adventurous Gnipho had
reached and reconnoitered the entrance of the cave. For the prætor’s
reassurance of the favorable acception of the enterprise by the
citizens, the leaders of those who were formerly disaffected made a
public acknowledgment of their transgressions, at the same time
tendering their full submission to his direction. Although greatly
shocked with the atrocity of their meditated treachery he forgave them
without reproach.

The river savages, feeling secure against surprise from the watchful
care of the guards before the cinctus gates, and sentinels upon the
brink of the precipice overlooking the city, left but few of their
number to guard the cave. When sufficiently dark to screen their
movements, on the night set for the fruition of their enterprise, the
men, women, and children of Heraclea were astir, and ready to use the
utmost of their strength for the success of their foraging expedition.
When the Indian camp before the gates had become quiet the party
selected to surprise the keepers of the cave started and without
difficulty effected their purpose. The prætor leading the surprise party
had ordered that the Indian guards should be secured without the loss of
life, if it could be effected without endangering the success of the
undertaking. But their savage desperation in using their teeth rendered
the destruction of life necessary. This was effected by suffocation,
advised by the Dosch that marks of violence might be avoided, hoping
thereby to involve with mysterious dread the cause of death; as the
river savages were known to hold as strong a belief in the agency of
evil spirits, as the Heracleans in the vengeful ire of their gods. While
the bodies of the savage guards were being placed in imposing attitudes
to excite the awe of their companions when discovered, the work of
transporting the stores of the cave had already commenced, great care
being taken that no vestige should be dropped by the way to indicate the
course, or from whence, in identification, the despoilers came. The
llamas, after the transportation of the stores was accomplished, were
stabled in the southern crematorial temple, under the screen of the
cloud mist of the falls, which had formerly subserved, under the
ritualistic ceremonies of priestcraft, to mystify the superstitious of
the Heracleans.

With the first gleam of the sun on the dial brink of the falls, on the
succeeding morning, the Heracleans offered their first pæan song of
thanksgiving, before the open portals of their houses, in gratitude for
the inauguration of an era of plenty; the first in the provisionary
record of centuries. After their morning meal they engaged in their
usual avocations with wonted composure; at least in as much as the
savages could detect from their perch on the brink of the precipice; but
to the close observer there was an elation in the expression of their
faces that gave sure indication of a recent event of extraordinary
import, proclaiming a happy emancipation from anxiety. At the suggestion
of the Dosch the volantaphs watched the movements of the different
tribes to observe the effect produced by the discovery of their loss.
Until after the meridian hour had passed the vicinity of the grotto
granary gave no indications of life, then a heavy rain set in, that
served to still further delay visits of inquiry prompted by the non-
appearance of the store guards. But early on the following morning the
wildest commotion prevailed, the tribes in scattered bands were seen
hastening from every quarter toward the cave. For the first time panic
fear, in attraction, made them forget the objects of their undying
vengeance, for the camps were deserted on every side, leaving the city
to its own guard. This opportunity offered for a second sally was not
neglected. A large amount of forage was collected from the deserted
camps; but from the signaled report of a retrograde movement, still more
disordered in the haste of fright, the Heracleans were about to abandon
it to the flames, when they fortunately recollected that they held in
possession the arms of the savages, so they easily turned the current
aside and garnered their second trove safely within the city gates.

A bee phaeton had been held in requisition by the Dosch to observe the
effect of Gnipho’s ghastly array of dead savages, in pantomimic
postures, with eyes distended, and outspread hands as if to guard them
from a sight of horror, while their backs were half turned as if
deprived of life in the act of escaping. When the Dosch arrived the
savages were collected around the mouth of the cave, none having the
courage to enter, but all, in act, were seemingly desirous of obtaining
the intervention of his neighbor’s body as a shield of protection from
apprehended danger. But at last the luskols (Indian priests) were forced
into the cave, the lesser grades being used as a wall of protection for
the higher. The Dosch described the scene as horribly ludicrous when
viewed from their interior position. “The fearful contortions of the
diviners, as they were pushed forward with their unwilling features half
exposed to the light from the mouth of the cave, in contrast with the
dead dramatis personæ, furnished a study that we had no desire to
prolong with the concurrent evidence of fear derived from auramentation.
It was a hideous sight to behold these otherwise untamable brutes in
human form, so abjectly appalled by the dead bodies of their late
companions, simply from an arrangement in posture at variance with their
traditional ideas of cadaverous propriety. Bewildered with the first
glance, they became, of themselves, immovable with fright, until the
reactive alarm from the cavernous sound reëchoing the breathing catches
and grunts of the struggling mass behind, caused a frantic effort of
wild desperation to regain the freedom of the open air. This contagious
spasm of fear relaxed the energies of those obstructing the entrance so
that they were held intact, a helpless mass immovably impacted over
which those from the interior made their way in scrambling disregard to
the means used in effecting their liberation. Paralyzed in voice
utterance, the only sounds heard were shuffling struggles accompanied by
a succession of ucks from the by no means gentle action of elbows upon
opposing bodies. When at length the blockading mass crawled forth,
bruised to the necessity of quadrumanal progression, their luskols had
disappeared in flight. After the cave was cleared we took a high bee-
line, from which we were able to see at a glance the many curious scenes
enacted in their flight from the self pursuit of fear, which in
variation kept us constantly convulsed with laughter.” The day was well
advanced before all the stragglers regained their despoiled camps; then,
without apparent regard for their loss, they commenced a second exodus
to a grove under the precipice to the south of the city, with the
evident intention of being as far from the reach of the cave’s scroul
influence as possible. With the certainty that fear would prevent the
savages from trespassing within the prescribed boundaries to the north
of the city, Giganteo assured the prætor that the citizens need have no
fear of using the pasture and arable land, accessible by the basin
bridge, in the night time, if they would only take the precaution to
dress in white, as that was esteemed by the superstitious of all tribes
and nations as the favorite color of spirits blest and damned. The
besiegers soon became aware of a marked improvement in the physical
condition of the besieged. This they attributed to the unfitness of
their luskols, who were deposed and sacrificed upon their own altars.

The Dosch, relator, here remarked that instinctive fear excited from
variations in natural cause and effect from accustomed routine was alike
common to all the grades of animality. The dogs howl in dread from the
sun’s eclipse; the cattle of the plain, and swine, the omnivorous
congeners of mankind, will pass unheeded the dead of their species when
the cadavers are natural in position, but when suspended from the
branches of trees they become affected with the impulse of dismay, and
like the savages endeavor to escape from the scene without the motive
power of direction. The birds of the air are paralyzed with the same
impulse of instinctive terror when warned of the earthquake’s shock by
the herald hush of preternatural silence. Taking advantage of these
controlling fears of instinct, that prey upon themselves in retributive
reprisal, “philosophic” and designing mythologists have conjured creed
distinctions of imaginary attributes, which in combination are unitized
under the style of soul. Upon this mythical assumption of attributive
materialization, they have founded a system of compensation for its
salvation, in a mazy labyrinthine series with a graceless cordon of
conditional graces under the signs manual of saving, efficacious,
sufficient, and redeeming privilege. In contradistinction to this
undefinable process of instinctive soul elaboration in the scale of
rewards, follows the retributive punishments, but so inextricably
intermixed in chaotic confusion that ritualistic words of lunatic
designation are used in substitution for the intelligent expression of
thought. The priesthood of the sects, or herds, that become adherents to
the formalistic use of words and material rites administered for
instinctive regeneration, talk in public discourse to distract attention
from the peaceful meditation of goodness. Notwithstanding the
multiplication of these most daring and glaring inconsistencies, which
have banished with truth, sincerity, and confiding affection, the masses
of humanity are still held in blind subserviency to the fantastic rules
and rulers of instinct in kind. You will scarcely wonder at the slight
impression that we have made with auramental thought substitution, while
the instincts of your race are constantly distracted with the bellowing
exhortations of sectarian recruiting preachers, in combination with
inebriate oaths of the passers-by in derisive profanation of the
worshiper’s selfish deity. Perversion and prostitution have so degraded
the legitimate powers of perception, that the pleasures of instinct have
become a source of misery from nauseating excess in over-indulgence.
Indeed, from sheer disgust, we have been inclined to discontinue
auramentation altogether; for your pretentious civilization, and
enlightened progression, is in fact nothing more than savagery refined
with art inventions for the morbid gratification of instinctive
sensuality; which in recurring product have given birth to toil and
turmoil, greedy vexations, strife, hatred, and kindred passionate
distempers cultivated in infatuated expectation that they will yield in
reversion, after death, instinctive soul purification and a heaven of
peaceful rest.

The Betongese, although accounted savages, would disdain to acknowledge
ancestors who had tried in ecclesiastical courts of luskol diviners,
dogs and swine for murder and witchcraft, with the farcical appointment
of civil pleaders of the legal fraternity for their defense!
notwithstanding the special qualifications of the latter for clearing
the defendants. From your ready appreciation of the higher dispensations
of purity and goodness, in exampled enactment, the Heracleans can
scarcely realize that you ever participated in the ruling delusions of
your race. Your physical comfort, and freedom from insect plagues, in
Heraclea, are derived in legacy bestowal from ancestral purity, devised
in healthy enactment by the Heracleans to fulfill present attainment. By
following these corrective indications your race would forefend their
kind from the imposed penalties of curative professional plagues, who
flourish from maladies bred in the flesh from over indulgence, in
reckless regard of the certain recurrence of like from like. Our falcons
in their three days passage across the ocean emit the osprey’s fishy
odor; and with assimilation the English, French, and Germans exhibit in
national crudities the instinctive effects of diet. These are inevitable
facts that admit of no palliative variation in deterioration in the
process of hereditary transmission; this an observer of a single
generation cannot fail to discover if possessed with ordinary powers for
comparative discernment. With this deviation from our historical path,
designed for Mr. Welson’s analytical aid in the classification of
evidences pertaining to the gradation developments of instinct, we will
now continue our relation by quoting from the chronicler Titview’s
record of the 2d Falcon Era.




                             CHAPTER XVII.


The sons and daughters of Indegatus had become so well instructed in the
art of propagating and training falcons, and withal so much interested
under the direction of the volantaphs, that little danger was
apprehended of another interruption in the supply. When all the
preliminaries required for the voyage across the Atlantic had been well
matured, Soartus, with a fleet of five well equipped falcons, and fifty
giantesco companions with their families started from Maniculæ on their
adventurous flight, and on the evening of the third day arrived at Corvo
without accident, and were overjoyed, in their descent to perch on the
Corcovado, to observe signals of welcome as if their coming had been
anticipated by premonition. In explanation, after a joyful welcome, the
Corcovadians said, that a watch had been kept constantly on the alert in
expectation of their reappearance, during the interval of the many
centuries which had elapsed since the last falcon departure. From
whatever cause the delay, their confidence had grown in strength, that
it would be overcome in time by the enterprise of their parentcedors.

This reunion of the Manatitlans with their Corcovadian colonistic
outposts occurred on or about the 17th day of August, 1071 of your era.
The voyage had been well sustained by the novice falcons,
notwithstanding their recently acquired art of taking flying fish, and
feeding while beating support with their wings under the favoring aid of
the parachute. But hunger is an apt teacher of method with available
means for its appeasement. The first warning the aeronauts received of
their near approach to the land of their destination was the invasion
from the windward of a suffocating odor, of the most disgusting taint,
that pervaded the howdahs and assailed their olfactories, causing a
violent retching, that made them apprehend pending calamity. But the
pilots, when sufficiently recovered from the sudden invasion, consulted
their charts of odor currents “laid down” by old navigators, and found
that the nauseating cause of alarm proceeded from the confluent waft of
Celtic and Congo exhalations from humanity, with the conjunctive loom of
garlic odor in eructation from the inhabitants of Portugal, Spain, and
south of France conveyed seaward by the evening land breeze, marked
_Fœdisima allium exhalata ab homine_. After giving vent to humorous
instinctive comparisons referring to the gross habits necessary for the
production of odors so foul in their distant waft, the old peak of
rendezvous on the island of Corvo saluted their glad vision.

Our reception by the Corcovadians was affectionate beyond comparison,
fully enlisting our utmost resources in reciprocation. When the
exuberance of our mingled congratulations had subsided into the calm
current of sympathetic inquiry, we soon became aware of their loving
troth to Manatitlan habits and customs. In evidence of the lealty of
their alliance they had diminished a third in numbers, as they averred,
with a marked improvement in all the essentials of affectionate purity
and goodness, manifest alike in the conservation of physical and
thoughtful development. In answer to our solicitous inquiries with
regard to the welfare of the Animalculan and Giga population of the
islands and mainland, they answered that the inhabitants of the islands
had become more barbarously enlightened and destructive in tendency than
they were in our ancestors’ time; our Mouthpat deportations having added
fuel to the degenerative tendency of the islanders. Still the good
example of the colonists had attracted a desire on the part of parents
that their children should be educated under their instruction.

After a week’s sojourn with the Corcovadians, Soartus continued his
flight to Rome, taking with him as many of the islanders as the howdahs
could accommodate. “Soaring to our first poise above the peaks of the
Asturian mountains, we hailed with matin song of praise the broad disc
of the sun as it reflected, in ascendency from the horizon, the
inequalities of the countries beneath in panoramic light and shadow. As
it rose in the full splendor of its mellowed morning beams, dispelling
with sparkling reflection the dewy mists of night, a scene of surpassing
beauty greeted our vision. From north to south, on the western confines
of the Iberian peninsula, a lofty range of intervaled mountains formed
an inviting attraction for the mist clouds, which dispensed their
moisture as an ever replenishing source of rivers and streams, that in
descent received tributary contributions rendering with their water
supply the valleys fertile. In continuation from the extreme south, a
sea-coast range of lesser height formed an interior basin, by circle
inclosure to the east and north. Within this, cities and hamlets were
scattered with seeming indications of peaceful repose. Our eyes were
held entranced with the beautiful scene; and we wondered how man, gifted
with rational powers of discernment, could fail to discover in the
lovely blendings Creative indications designed for his direction in the
paths of peace and purity. The falcons, left to the guidance of their
own pleasurable instincts, just cleared the topmost sprays of the trees
in their gliding circuits, but in soaring above villages and cities the
volantaphs raised their flight beyond the reach of missile weapons.
While passing over the city of Leon from north to south, we saw men,
women, and children, flocking in crowds to the western gate. Curious to
learn the cause of this early commotion, so unwonted from the
descriptions we had read of Iberian habits, the falcons were directed
over the point of attraction. Clearing in circling descent the spires
and towers of the cathedral church, our ears were saluted with the
mingled bellowings of a seemingly enraged animal, and loud shouts
arising from a multitudinous collection of voices pitched in range from
the shrill stridency of childhood, through the medium grades of
maturity, to the vacuous piping tones of senility. Over-reaching the
gate towers, we beheld collected in an amphitheatre within wooden
barriers, a large concourse of people, intently gazing with boisterous
plaudits upon an encounter between a horned animal of the quadruped
species and armed men with garments covered with tinsel. The sides of
the enraged beast were dabbled and trickling with gore, from the many
wounds inflicted by the knives and spears of the “sportsmen.” In quick
apprehension of the effect of this cruel pastime, which had caused our
wives to give utterance to a cry of pitying horror, the volantaphs
suddenly depressed the falcon’s tail from the “bishop’s run to the
pope’s nose” causing it to fan-spread, intercepting the view of objects
beneath from the howdah; then soaring to a poise, soon left the
revolting scene and arbiters of cruel instinct beyond the compass of
eyes and ears. One of our Corcovadian correlatives then explained the
nature and origin of the amusement. He said that it was styled by the
Spanish a taurista, and when it commenced at sunrise it was styled
“taurista hiquete para almuerzo.” The practice was said to have been
derived originally from a race inhabiting an island in the northern
ocean, who utilized the flesh of the slain brutes, and as a sequence
assimilated their pugnacious characteristics.

“Here the volantaph directed our attention to the cultivated beauties of
the Apuljarras of the Sierra Constantina, glowing in the morning sun
with the brightest tints of verdure. Wooded and vine-covered slopes in
ever varying contrast with the colored transitions of Moslem taste in
the adornment of their dwellings, offered the strongest evidence of
peaceful desire, notwithstanding minarets indicating fanatical worship
abounded in cities, villages, and hamlets. As we neared these scenes,
citizens and busy cultivators were seen engaged in their varied
occupations, their forms reduced by distance from giga size to tits,
reminded us of our own happy Manatitlan homes. The swift flight of the
falcons conveyed the impression, from change in perspective, of gliding
transitions of the same persons into varied employments, as if endowed
with illimitable versatility. These pleasing illusions, which in slower
flight, and nearer approach, would have truthfully depicted the
miserable realities of servile selfishness, so much dreaded in foreboded
encounter with the Giga races of Europe and Asia, caused Uffea, the wife
of Soartus, to exclaim, with a long drawn sigh—“If they could only see
and know us, I am sure they could not resist our happy example that
would make this scene a reality? They surely would not refuse a joyous
boon that would make these blooming valleys and verdant hills echo with
songs of gladness raised in morning and evening praise? What joy for the
future Manatitlan voyagers while floating over these lovely creations,
if our people could be made the means of making these groves and hill-
sides resound with songs of praise to unite in their fullness, with our
peoples, in mid air responses?” Our hopeful sighs united with the desire
that her vision might prove prophetic. But alas, our falcons had scarce
attained their poise for descent to the Valentinian shore, when fierce
human cries, and the loud clangor and blasts from cymbals and trumpets,
resounded from the plain below. The volantaphs reverse in the direction
of the falcons for descent, brought into view two hosts engaged in
battle encounter, each in defiant utterance shouting their war cries,
one, “Dios y Santiago,” and the opposed “Allah é Profeta.” No persuasion
could induce our wives to venture a glance toward the fearful scene, and
at their request the volantaphs changed the falcon’s course to shut out
the view.

Our Corcovadian correlative in defining the casus belli, said, that
those fighting under the standard that bore the device of a grotesque
head covering, supported by crossed keys, were styled Christians, and
the words, God and Saint James, which they ejaculated with their blows,
were the names of the alleged author and favorite supporter of their
creed, which theoretically inculcated peace and goodwill among men.
While those arrayed under the crescent banner, who were as vehemently
calling upon their god and prophet, were enjoined by their creed to
destroy all who denied the divinity of the prophet. Both alike, in
practice, upheld the absurd inconsistency of their creeds with the
destructive fanaticism of instinctive passion. “As you will in Rome be
forced to give heed to the brutal enactments practiced under the style
of religion, and opposing variations in Constantinople and Jerusalem, it
will be well to advise you of the texts that are quoted in train by the
Christian sect, who are exhorted, in the battle cry, to strike for the
God of Israel, and Saint James,—kill and spare not! The grateful teeth
of the saws read in this wise, Do good to those who despitefully treat
thee! He that smiteth thee on one cheek turn to him the other also! He
that gives to the poor, lendeth to the Lord. Cast your bread upon the
waters, and after many days it will return to you increased an hundred
fold. These renderings of implied selfishness in mild vapory language,
you have seen exemplified in enactments this morning; but you have still
to undergo the painful infliction of sympathy for physical torments that
priestcraft imposes, with the anticipation of ‘hellish’ power, for the
punishment of dissenting heretics. The Moslems, who are fighting under
the crescent standard, advocate sensual lunacy, with the prescribed
belief in a heavenly haram peopled with houri,—a name that they bestow
upon sensuously beatific women, who in Christian terms are styled
angels,—these are used as lures for inciting the lusts of the faithful
in blind subserviency to the commands of their leaders. Like their
Christian opponents, the masses depend solely upon priestly
interpretation for the reconciliation of contradictory passages in their
creed, openly bestowing their reverential fealty upon the sensually mad,
who are called saints or santons, esteeming the touch of their lewd
filthiness as a vise for heavenly reward. Their priests, who are styled
dervishes, wear the same hermaphrodite vestments in ceremonial
enactments that distinguish their Christian counterparts, deriving
oracular inspiration from dizziness invoked by rapid whirling gyrations.
But as I see that you are oppressed with sorrowful disgust, in view of
the rank stupidity you are about to encounter, we will allow you, with
these premonitions, to verify the construction we give of the ancient
giga Roman senator’s apothegm, which should have been, ‘whom the gods
wish to destroy, they first make sensually mad.’ With the instinctive
example of destructive hatred inculcated as a morning lesson for
appetizing the kindred germ of children’s passions, in the bloody
struggle between inhuman art aids and brute strength, exhibited in the
bull’s blind rage, we can easily fill the intervening space in life with
occupations in qualification for the battle enactments of the meridian.”

With the volantaph’s announcement that he was about to bring the falcon
to a poise which would afford the occupants of the howdah an equidistant
view of the peninsulas of Spain and Italy, a retrospective glance was
cast backward. The keen Manatitlan sight, intensified with ardent
admiration for the glowing beauties of the Iberian landscape, soon
became absorbed in tracing the rare combinations of mountain and valley
verdure, merging and varying in blending tints from the sun’s declining
cast of light and shadow, until startled with Uffea’s sudden call, Alew!
(look!) Recalled by her startled cry, our attention was attracted by her
steadfast look, to the Valentian shore, and there beheld the victorious
Christians in pursuit of the vanquished Moslems, vindicating the cry of
their priests, “Kill and spare not.” “Alas,” tearfully sighed Uffea, “is
it not enough that they yield the victory? of what avail the bodies of
the flying, living or dead, that the victors still ruthlessly pursue and
slay?”

Anxious to escape from even a distant view of the carnage, the volantaph
brought the falcon to a poise and in descent opened to view the
peninsula of Italy. In anxious search for the abiding place of their
colonistic correlatives, their attention was soon attracted to the
largest collection of buildings, and as the falcon’s circuits narrowed
in near approach, their eyes sought for signals of recognition. These,
from a “bird’s eye” view chart of the prominent buildings in the
vicinage of Rome, soon became visible, not only from the coliseum, the
chief settlement of their colonies, but from every town and hamlet
within the reach of vision. With a near approach to the arcades every
available place in the Ionic range was filled to overflowing with
beaming faces and outstretched arms in token of joyful welcome. But a
few moments elapsed before the falcons were safely moored in the old
“New Port,” and the howdahs thronged with forms and faces that required
no introduction by speech for the test of nationality. Without words,
joyful tears, sighs, kisses, and embraces were not alone conceded as the
special privilege of womanly affection, but the interchange of these
instinctive tokens under the kindly promptings of gladness became
general. If there was hesitation indicating speech, those on the outside
pressed forward to interrupt the useless waste of words. For at least a
full half hour this voiceless scene continued unabated, then the prætor
of Coliseo parleyed. “Citizens of Romelia, forbear? What have these, of
our kin, done in the lapse of ages, that you suffocate them with kisses
and embraces? Are they, in the fullness of our joy, to be denied the
viaticum of welcome words? or do you intend to despatch them with the
silent interdiction of tidings we have waited and longed for while yet
unborn to the world of mortality? Make way for your prætor! Fie upon
you, Oluissandra! that you, the wife of the chief magister of Coliseo,
should fail to use your tongue in speech, when its words would be
welcome!”

With this laughing admonition a tall active giantesco sprang into the
howdah, and seizing a sprightly medium woman by the shoulders, as she
was about to embrace Uffea, turned her briskly round, with the
exclamation, “Now for some system? I am ashamed of you, Olui! Where is
your boasted presence of mind and pity? and voice, so easily aroused in
gratuitous sympathy for your Giga auramentees? Do you suppose that this
little handful of women can withstand the battery of Coliseo’s
thousands, softly placable as they are, without having their lips and
faces flayed? Now Signorina Manatitliana, this is my wife Oluissandra
Peasiffea, of the twelfth generation in descent from the Peasiffeas of
Maniculæ,—that is, I am, and she shares my loving pedigree, with a
worthy merit that exceeds my own.”

Before the last clause, Uffea had embraced the wife of the Coliseo
prætor with cousinly warmth. The husband laughingly thanked her for
honoring his spouse with such affectionate returns upon the strength of
relationship, but hoped that the slight deviation from the “giga lineal”
would not prove a bar to the full expression of loving confidence. This
diversion set the women’s tongues in motion, with trills and fugues,
which were followed by the men’s deeper tones, in more measured accents
of curious inquiry. With the sun’s decline all united in a hymn of
thanksgiving. As the gathering shades of twilight deepened, Oluissandra
reminded her husband that the Manatitlan howdahs were poorly adapted for
the reception of the prætor of Coliseo’s guests upon an occasion so
extraordinary? “If the public records are to be trusted,” she said,
“they will bear testimony that it has been customary for the chief
magisters to offer their guests the hospitality of their houses. It will
hardly consort with precedent, if the scribe should in record addenda
state that the prætor Peasiffea entertained his Manatitlan relatives in
their own howdahs, at the reunion of their peoples, after centuries of
separation. I am sorry,” she continued, “that courtesy obliges me to
give you this public reproof, but your ‘head and heart’ should have been
on the alert to give a suitable welcome, as the long delay might conjure
sensitive doubts questioning the sincerity of your joy.”

The prætor gave his wife a look of quizzical gratitude at this rejoinder
couched in Giga style, reminding the chief and his wife of the Dosch’s
humorous sallies. In like manner they were constantly reminded of home
faces and scenes by revived similitude in impression. Among the
Manatitlans, and their Corcovadian correlatives, the questioning query
would pass, “Who does this or that person remind you of?” or “How
familiar that voice sounds.” When the resemblance was mentioned, the
likeness was found to have been transmitted by collateral branches. The
prætor, acting upon his wife’s suggestion, our falcons received the
attention they required from Coliseo volantaphs, the mews having been
kept in readiness for their reception from generation to generation, in
constant expectation of their reappearance. Our own apartments, which
adjoined those of the prætor, were in the foliated cyma of the capital
surmounting the second arch of the Corinthian Arcade. On our way the
prætor pointed out the improvements devised and executed by his
predecessors, regretting that their comparatively indestructible works
should be ingrafted upon one of the perishable follies of the Roman
empire for its more extended time durability.

At dawn, on the morning succeeding our arrival, anxious throngs were
awaiting to greet us with salutations of joyful welcome. Many of these
had come from distant districts to participate in the rejoicings of an
occasion so auspicious for the united welfare of the colonies. Among the
visitors, there came from the St. Angelo department the Dosch of
Romalia. He had started with the first announcement of the falcons, and
traversed the city of the gigas during the height of one of their
saturnalian feasts of flesh, which precedes the lighter indulgences of
fasting upon a fish and lentil diet. After the morning salutations, the
falcons were employed in excursions for the practical instruction of the
native volantaphs. On the third day after our arrival, the Dosch and
prætor consulted the chief of the Manatitlans upon a subject that had
been a source of disquietude to the colonists.

“We have deferred the unpleasant subject we are about to introduce, to
the latest possible moment consistent with the responsibility of our
charge,” said the prætor of Coliseo, “that the impression of our welcome
might remain cheerful until you had fully compared the extent of our
worthiness with your expectations. The sooner anxiety is dispelled with
a knowledge of impending evil the better. The Mouthpat seed our mutual
ancestors sowed, just before the close of the first falcon era, in
taking root assimilated with the native Animalculan races, and in
process imparted their own deleterious habits and prejudices to their
entertainers. With a wider scope for the gratification of their sensual
instincts, they soon united with the democratic rabble of Rome in
opposing what they termed our pedantic puritanism. With their coadjutive
stimulation our allies in the exampled practice of purity and goodness
were subjected to annoyances and persecutions and were denied the right
of local option, as natives, in selecting for themselves a choice of
education for their children. As we could not extend our protection to
the good throughout the broad expanse of Rome, we established self-
supporting colonies in the country as asylums of resort for the
oppressed, so that in consolidated association they might receive our
more effective support and aid. Still, in defiance of intimidation and
actual injuries, we had more applications for the admission of Roman
children to our schools than we could accommodate. The deported
Mouthpats, from the first, became adherent imitators of Giga habits and
customs, and fanatically zealous in support of the Catholic dogmas.
Before their advent, the Animalculans of Rome had been content that the
Giga priests should enact their parts in ceremonial worship. But the
Mouthpats urged that the practice of vicarious worship through a race
barred from direct communication by mouth interlocution was a subterfuge
of the most damnable tendency. Their labors for the reconstruction of
the ritualistic tenets, and regeneration of the Animalculans from
proxied dependency upon Giga religious administration, was finally
rewarded with the election of a pope of Mouthpat descent. This pope,
Innocent the First, in Mouthpat designation, now occupies the silicoth
residences relinquished to the first cargo of his ancestors, by ours on
their removal to the Coliseum. In imitation of Giga example, although he
claims higher merit from his strict administration of the ordinances of
the church, he has established a court of inquisition for the trial and
punishment of heretics.

“One of the first acts of the court was the proclamation of an interdict
prohibiting the Romans from holding communication with the Coliseos
under the penalty of excommunication from the only true and holy church.
We well understood the term excommunication in context, although the
court was wary in using threats of torture and death, against the
parents who had entrusted their children to our care, until they had
tested our disposition by overt acts of intimidation. For this purpose
they have arrested the parents of our pupils on their return to Rome
after paying their monthly visits to their children. To-morrow they
celebrate a saint’s day, in the calendar of the Mouthpat Church, and are
erecting in the gutter-leads of the church of San Lorenzo, lists with
barriers and the usual requisites necessary for the accommodation of
spectators, and actors that engage in the barbarous follies of a
tournament. But the real object is the inauguration of an inquisitorial
chapter. The pomp and ceremonials only serving as an introductory blind,
that will hold pity in check by arousing the passions with chivalric
show in brutal enactment as a placebo for the final catastrophe. In
order that the pomp might equal that of their Giga exemplars, who are
engaged in preparing for a like celebration, they in anticipation sent
challenges to the most celebrated and valorous representatives of
Animalculan knighthood throughout the courts of Europe, subject to a
like defiance from their Giga contemporaries; whose heralds acted as the
locomotive beasts of burden for the transportation of their parasitic
knights errant. To prevent imposition, the field kings of all the
countries in Christendom, subject to Animalculan sway, were requested to
add their attest to the order and standing of the knight applicants,
also to the service reputation of esquires emulous of achieving the
honorable distinction of wearing golden spurs. The requirements of those
desirous of contending for love and honor in the lists, on roachback
with spear and sword, were—to be of pure lineage, of not less than three
generations, in affirmed descent, free from the attaint of mesalliance.
The squires were to be second sons of a parentage alike eligible for the
distinctions of knighthood. That the trains of each knight should be
well satisfied with their allotment, the third day was set apart for
their contention with arms suited to their stations in life; ample means
were to be furnished for the eating and drinking entertainment of all
comers. The knights summoned had already arrived in train with the Gigas
who had been cited for the tournament in preparation for the first
crusade designed for the redemption of the holy sepulchre from the
possession of the infidel Saracens, in which the Animalculans will also
engage. The first course, in this tournament of human instinct, will be
inaugurated after a grand high mass, to be held in conjunction with the
Gigas, the priests of both races joining in the ceremonial
administration of the rites. After the grand ‘entre’ the first course
will be run between Count Marceroni, the Roman champion, and any knight
bold enough to accept his challenge. The first encounters are to be on
roachback with spears, in support of the affirmed superiority, in
beauty, of the contestant’s countrywomen, or “ladies,” in the style of
the challenge. The proclamation sets forth that the encounter will be
conducted in freedom from the slights of incantation, or other
surreptitious advantages, in fair and open battle, The first unroached
will be declared vanquished, yielding to the victor the right of
heralding the supremacy of his countrywomen’s beauty, with the privilege
of selecting from them a queen to reign during the continuance of the
jousts, as the empress paramount of love, honor, and beauty. The second
day’s joust will be a contention with axes, maces, and thorn sticks; the
victor will be awarded the privilege of selecting a lady to preside over
the distribution of prizes to the successful in the melée, or herd
encounters of third day’s strife.

“This sketch of the announced proceedings, will give you an idea of the
amusements patronized by the Gigas under the ‘angelic’ supervision of
women, with the sounding style of chivalric. But with both races, the
preliminary amusements are devised as placebos to invite in transition
awe, rather than indignation and horror for the final tragedy of human
sacrifice. Your opportune arrival will, with falcon aid, render our
service effectual in baffling their intended murderous enactment, if our
emprise meets with your approval.”

The chief and his associates warmly approved of the course proposed,
offering to undertake alone the hazard of its successful issue, that the
reproof might be in effect more significant of intention in the event of
future transgressions. The scenes enacted at the tournament, the Dosch
said he would relate in quotation from the chronicler Titview’s letter
to Giganteo.




                             CHAPTER XVIII.

    COLISEO, departmental colonial settlement, or chief city of
       Romalia, _on the fifth of Ratu, of the one hundred and eighth
       century of the Manatitlan era, decio multiplex_.


REVERED ADVISOR:—In accordance with your request, I send you an account
of a visit, which in company with the chief and our associates, was made
to the temporal dominions of the Mouthpat pope, Innocent First, for the
rescue of Roman tits, who had been kidnapped on their return from the
monthly visitation of the Coliseo schools. The object of the pope,
prompting this human theft, was to effect intimidation by offering them
as a public sacrifice, or burnt offering to the god of their worship,
after the manner of the Tenockitlans, Manchees, and other civilized
nations of Mauna Luna. The vatican, or stronghold of this Animalculan
sect, styled Christians, is situated on the leads of the Giga church San
Lorenzo, formerly occupied by our colonists, and by them transferred to
the Mouthpats as a leasehold to be secured in perpetuation for the
consideration of reciprocal good will. The church of San Lorenzo, as it
is now called, was remodeled by the present Giga Christian dynasty, from
the temple of Faustina, by Antoninus, surnamed the Pious, as a
distinctive memorial of regard for his wife. In the process of
renovation required for the new form of mythological worship, the outer
walls, with their architectural ornaments, were left unmolested above
the entablature of the cornice, which upon the inner face, looking out
upon the leads, contained the sacred dove-cotes or cells. These the
Manatitlan colonists had appropriated by ejecting the unbaptized
usurpers of the pagan oracles, which in turn they relinquished to the
Mouthpat sympathizers of the new ritualists succeeding to the interior
of the edifice. The roof was accessible to the Animalculans by a jutting
rear X buttress erected for the support of the inner incline of the
lateral walls. For a long time the cells were jointly occupied by the
Manatitlans and dove descendants of the legitimate Giga divinity of the
church, who found themselves controlled in flight by a mysterious power
adverse to their natural inclinations and gregarious flock associations.
These could have been made excellent substitutes for falcons, but like
all of the animal species that congregate in flocks and herds, they were
subject to unclean parasites, rendering them obnoxious to purity, which
caused their ejection by a process as mysterious to their comprehension,
as that which had previously controlled their flight. Ten months
previous to our arrival the Giga pope had announced a tourney, or
‘passage-at-arms,’ upon a scale of unprecedented magnificence, for the
advancement of a crusade against a race of Moslems, who exacted tribute
from Christian pilgrims on their way to the holy sepulchre of their
creed. The chief honor to be awarded the victor, was the command of the
forces levied for the holy war. But each of the contestants was obliged
to offer for the acceptance of the king herald, irrefragable proof of
his blood nobility, and faith in the immaculate conception, pope’s
infallibility, and Catholic efficacy of saving grace. We arrived in Rome
four days previous to the one designated for the grand ceremonial
opening of the Animalculan court of valor, which, as a special
distinction, was to be honored with the pope’s presence and arbitration.
As the descendants of the Mouthpats have not improved in the industrial
habits of self-devisement in the economy of time for useful purposes, we
were able to secure our position on the roof balance of the portico
without being observed. Directly opposite is the vatican, or oracular
palace of the Pope Innocent. This is one of the larger dove-cotes which
had been finished in silicoth by the Manatitlan colonists as an
anthemeque, or place of public assemblage, and is now occupied by his
“holiness” as the dove successor divinity of the roof. An hour or more
after our arrival, the familiars with their working aids commenced the
labors of preparation, and from the character of their employments it is
evident that there will be no cooing notes of sympathy expended in
behalf of suffering victims.

In the northern gutter of the leads the lists are erected. The galleries
rise in backward ascent from the arena. The terraced gradations are
adapted to rank founded upon material possessions; the lowest are
intended for the nobility, or landed proprietors; the next grade is
allotted to the rich in gold and silver, or materials in trade, these
are styled merchant commoners; the highest or galley, the tribune
informs me, is destined for the gods, as the rabble are facetiously
called. If the terms of expression interest you, their generic source
can be traced in the Chinese and Babylonish manuscripts of Animalculans
deposited by our old travelers in the archives of Maniculæ; from them
you will be able to judge of the progressive attainments of the Romans.
Our position will enable us to see and hear all that passes.

The canopy of the ladies gallery is of richly woven material,
contributed by a kabulistanee convert to the papal creed; as you will
not find an equivalent for the word “lady” and its co-appellative
“gentleman” in any of our indigenous writings, I will give you the
Coliseo tribune’s version. “A lady in Giga acceptation, is a woman who
employs, not only her own, but the time of her servants in the adornment
of her body with cumbersome material, greatly in excess of her
requirements for comfort and comeliness; in addition she does not
hesitate to apply pigments to her face. These aids are only limited by
the metallic means of supply; and, as your judgment will decide, they
detract not alone from personal purity, but render the persons of the
Giga females, in fact, repulsive. Still auramentation, with the
confirmation of the senses in support of our labors, has proved utterly
powerless for the successful stay of the fantastic follies that follow
in train from the gratification of woman’s envious rivalry. The term
chevalier, or gentleman, is still more vague in acceptation, and
application with the Gigas. Like virtue, conscience, morality, and
saving grace, the meaning depends upon arbitrary intonations of the
voice in application, without true intrinsic value for the expression of
means or substance realization. If you, or at least a tit, should ascend
to the tier that will be occupied by the gods, and suddenly accost one
of the meanest and most blasphemous of the noisy rabble, with the words,
“You are no chevalier, or gentleman,” you would be saluted in return
with a blow or volley of vile epithets too horrible for exampled
utterance.”

He was about to give farther proofs of the illusive beguilements of Giga
usage in word conversation, but was interrupted by the blasts of
sackbuts, and rumble of kettle-drums, from the tents of the challengers,
which were partially concealed by a flowery bosque, which had its source
from soil and seeds deposited by the doves. These signals quickened the
movements of some blackamoors who were decorating the canopied galleries
set apart for the ladies, the pope and his apostolic cardinals. Soon a
living stream of Animalculans began to deploy in descent from the
buttress turrets of the parapets, and when within hail commenced a
series of pantomimic imitations of the blacks’ deformities, accompanied
with gibing words, as if in cruel preparation for the scenes of the day.
Notwithstanding the serious nature of our mission, enhanced with the
fear of after self-censure, we could not withhold our instinctive
sympathy when the Ethiopians discomfited their democratic Mouthpat
assailants, who showed themselves in every respect inferior to their
swarthy opponents. The tilting touches of the blackamoors’ tongues,
often caused the Mouthpats to wince and brandish their thorn sticks with
the well known hereditary twirl, as if they desired to relieve the smart
with customary material arguments. The arrival of the higher orders of
Animalculan life, mounted on gayly caparisoned blatidean roaches,
beetles, and ants, created a diversion with less freedom in expression,
yet the democratic tendency of crowds to turbulence was still apparent,
for the knights in their turn became subject to the natural flow of
depreciation, but in tones subdued in measured prominence to a
comparison within and without the reach of the subject’s lance. Finally
the ladies were passed in review with rabberly freedom, but ever mindful
of the length of the knight attendants’ spears. And lastly, after the
beauty, dress, and palfrey management of the ants by the ladies, had
been freely discussed, the squires and grooms in livery, received the
dredged overplus of scurrilous scoffs and taunts. When the flourish of
trumpets and beadle cries reminded them of the more important calls of
selfishness for the rival displacement of early comers, we had the
disagreeable opportunity of witnessing a scene of uproar that baffles
description. During the struggle for places the bailiffs’ staffs were
used with a freedom that denoted the lowest degree of servile subjection
on the part of the herd.

While forced to listen to the vile language of the “plebs,” we were
constrained to hold in the balance of thought the questionable advantage
of speech for the advancement of purity and goodness, for as yet, an
affectionate word, or one of sympathy had not been spoken within my
hearing. The Coliseo tribune, who acted as my mentor, informed me that
the Giga children of Rome lisped oaths with the first impressions of
speech, and with the adventure of sentences used them for anathematizing
imprecations in demands for selfish gratification. The pursuivants’
calls, “Aller laisser!” Gallic Latin, of imperative command for space,
again attracted our attention to the lists, and from the commotion, it
was easy to perceive that the curiosity of the vast assemblage was on
the tiptoe of expectation. The prolonged flourish of trumpets, with the
clashing rattle and rumble of cymbals and kettle-drums, prepared us for
the heralded announcement of the approach of the accredited knights who
were to lead as challengers and challenged in the jousts for the awards
of honor. While passing in review before the ladies’ and popes’
pavilions, we had an excellent opportunity for comparing the relative
intelligence of those representing the different nationalities and
septs.

The first group were Austro-Germans; these were large in size and heavy
in feature and form, with a pervading vis inertia in their sluggish
movements. But to my surprise, the tribune informed me that in
ritualistic gymnastry, spear, and sword exercise, they were esteemed the
leading nation, although rarely successful in their encounters, as they
were too slow and methodical in delivering their blows, and as a general
result, they were unroached while deciding upon their point of attack.
Calling my attention to their movements, I could not fail to observe the
sluggish halo that seemed to invest both riders and cockroach steeds;
the latter, he said, grew to an enormous size in Germany, as in
omnivorous habits they assimilated with their national contemporaries of
the human species, whose intelligence was an instinctive reflection from
stomach distention to the brain. Notwithstanding the swinish cast of
their eyes, and sodden dullness of facial expression, there was out-
shadowed a nucleus reflection, through the gross embargo of fungous
flesh, that bespoke with its oppressed rays the still existence of the
animus of goodness; but it was so faintly luminous that it failed to
make its source self-apparent. From the remarks of the tribune, it
appeared that the composite peculiarities of the German septs had been
derived from a dietetic source, dependent upon the digestive energy of
the stomach, and powers of distension for the disposal of sectional
ingesta, selected for the expression of divisional patriotism. The
mental effect produced was graduated from the wrangling source of
irritation, to the philosophic effect of over-distension, conjoined with
an owlish expression of vacuity in the region of the eyes. Although in
outward expression ritualistically Christian, their mouths and stomachs
were infidel in observance on fast-days, strenuously advocating the
future resurrection of the body in the stomach. The females belonging to
the family of the Count Palatine Von Lushmywitzs, possessed the elements
of physical beauty, but there was a subdued expression of the eyes, with
a pervading depression of deportment, exhibiting the guardian effects of
discipline administered in their male sponsors’ philosophic moods; also
in combination, a settled, disgustful despondency, emanating from an
association with their lords after they had become filled to repletion
with philosophic wisdom. It was easy, however, to perceive the
struggling elasticity of purity and goodness in outreaching desire for
kindred association, and hopeful deliverance from an entombed death of
corruption. Pointing out several knights and ladies of more compact
physical attainments, and vivacious movements in the expression of
thought correspondence with features, the tribune stated that their
improved appearance was solely dependent upon an admixture of foreign
blood, opposed to swilling barley mead, and coarse gluttony. Many of
these had sent their infants to Manatitlan colonistic schools, and, by
the after adoption of their children’s example, had raised themselves to
a comparative appreciation of the privileges bestowed for the elevation
of humanity above the coarser instincts of its sub-alliance with the
lower orders of animality.

The next train, in the knightly roachalvacade, embraced in the retinues
of its leaders the representative extremes of humanity in the British
Isles. They had bluff apetital features, with but a slight remnant
predisposition to the philosophical swinishness that enveloped with
fatty folds the direct descendants of their Saxo-German antecedents. In
the place of jowled lethargy, they presented bold taural fronts, with a
canine expression of tenacity about their mouths, that would cause you
to involuntarily shrink from a collision with their heads and teeth.
Indeed, their general aspect was stout and still in manifestation,
indicating strong bodily self-reliance. The women exhibited a robust air
of independence, with the pleasing accompaniment of rosy complexions, in
strong contrast with the pale, inanimative features of their German
cousins, which declared at sight their freedom from servility, with the
exhibition of a coexistent power that could turn or tame the obstinate
fronts of the males, when within the circle of their domestic domain.

Following close in the rear of English lead, came the Gallic French, who
with chattering volubility and grimace, more than supplied the paucity
of words used by those in advance. In personal characteristics they were
in every respect foreign to their preceding neighbors. Without listening
or replying they all talked in medley, which impressed me with the
conviction that they had no definite ideas beyond the present evidences
of their existence, or hopes of a future free from the predominating
influence of their bodies’ frivolous selfishness. This impression was
confirmed by the tribune, who said that sympathy with, and confidence in
their kind, were alike ignored, each holding that the gratification
afforded by the passing moment, was the only happiness and real hope,
life afforded.

“In accordance with these assumptions, which they verify in act, we have
found them loquaciously factious, and quite as unsettled as their Giga
countrymen and exemplars; expressing in a breath the strongest terms of
wordy affection and hatred for the same person, and in their constantly
recurring civil feuds, destroying their rulers and relatives with less
compunction than individuals of an opposing race. In verity from
frivolous habits in thought and act, they have become despicable
examples of the disorganizing effect of infidelity to Creative
indications designed for our self-control. The French women, as you
observe in the boldness of their public demeanor, are as vivaciously apt
for the illustration of the opposite gender’s instinctive ideas of
happiness in domestic association, as the German are submissive.”

The Spanish knightly representatives next passed in review. As roach
cavaliers, they were far above their predecessors in graceful bearing
and dignity of deportment; but their thoughts were inwardly disposed to
the sole devotion of self-contemplation, looking down from the lofty
pinnacle with supercilious complacency and condescension on all alike,
expecting from others the deferential consideration they paid to
themselves. The women were veiled and demure in bearing, but the
instinctive sparkle of their eyes defied the gauzy fabric’s concealment.

The Italians came next, yielding, as entertainers, precedence to the
four leading nations. The Mouthpat descendants of Italian nativity, as
is the wont of the stocks derived from their audacious ingraft, assumed
the lead. Closing the roachavalcade were knight adventurers from lesser
nationalities, lacking in numbers sufficient for separate display. Alas,
for my own and companion’s vaunted power of self-control over our
instinctive passions, when exposed from inexperience to human acts of
cruelty committed from the wantonness of power. As these human novelties
passed under our curious inspection, panoplied and strangely garbed in
glittering armour, one of the sturdy knights attached to the rear, in
mere wantonness for the exhibition of his prowess without the risk of
rebuttal, with the pretext of a gibing inquiry with regard to the health
of his maternal parent, suspended an unoffending tit dwarf by thrusting
his spear through his jerkin, holding him aloft, while the blood from a
flesh wound trickled over his hose. It was well for the successful issue
of our undertaking that a kindly disposed herald not only relieved him
from his uncomfortable plight but gave him the wherewith for the
purchase of another garment with the largesse he had received from the
other knights, and in retribution ejecting the offender with disgrace
from the lists. This justly merited punishment pacified our irate desire
to call the aggressor to an account for his wanton cruelty. The warmth
of our sympathetic pity caused the Coliseos, with a smile, to warn us
that if we attempted to redress all the wanton and cruel aggressions
that would be forced upon our notice, with the infliction of bodily
punishment, we should be obliged to forego the benefits of peaceful
example altogether. “We are powerless to stay the barbarous cruelties
they practice among themselves, and our interference would only serve to
aggravate the spirit of retaliation. From the beginning, the course
pursued by our people has been beset with many temptations provoking
arbitrary interference for the redress of wrongs. But they have managed
to escape free from serious difficulty up to the present time, and our
presence here to-day was compelled by affectionate sympathy to save the
lives of well disposed parents whose children have been intrusted to our
charge. With your aid we can now make a lasting impression that will
prevent future aggressions, for they have a hereditary dread of the
actual presence of the unadulterated Manatitlans.”

The trumpets sounding a parley for the announcement of the regulations
of the day, and terms of the challengers, caused us to give hasty thanks
to the tribune for his timely admonitions, with the promise that we
would try and hold our feelings aloof from passionate excitement in
behalf of all except those in whose aid we had enlisted. The lull that
succeeded the herald’s call permitted us to hear the alheu of the
pursuivant, but the special conditions of the challengers were drowned
by the renewed buzz of voices. Gathering strength from personal retorts,
they gave birth to sounds ranging from the high nasal to the low
guttural of the German dialects, accommodating themselves to fragmentary
enunciations of words, and the most dissonant syllabic combinations
possible in conjuration from the rumbling intonations of indigestion.
These crudities were jargonized with the curt unconsolidated English,
the fustian croak of the Dutch, Gallic flippancy, slipshod Irish, and
the nasal bagpipe drone or burr of the Scotch; to which was added the
quavering Italian, the soft flow of the Spanish, with cadenced harmony
of intonation, and the horrible rasping cartilaginous utterances of the
Jewish nose, so repulsively selfish that endurance shudders in memory of
the infliction. The tumult of tongues intercepted and confused the
herald’s announcement, so that we were dependent upon the pantomimic
acts of the stewards and beadles for an interpretation of the decrees
regulating the combat. The Coliseos were in no way anxious to witness
the medlarious enactments, so we were preferred to the most eligible
positions for the gratification of our newly fledged curiosity, which I
am ashamed to confess was over eager, and for the occasion must have
lowered us in the estimation of our cousins. Our position exposed to us,
in side view, the entire multitude in its caste gradations, from the
canopied pope and cardinals and their created nobility, with the “fair
ladyes” occupying the pavilion opposite, upward through the terraced
ascent to the “strident gods,” who worried each other with true
mythological zest when disengaged from the supervision of those below.
When eager expectation was at its height, attention was diverted from
the lists by solemn long drawn blasts of sackbuts accompanied with the
roll of drums. This new phase closed the mouths of yelping instinct, and
with the awed hush, the object cause of the doleful braying made its
appearance from the gates of a dovecot abbey. This was a priestly
procession moving with slow cadenced steps to the sound of an anthemed
dirge. The tribune, who seemed to be intuitively apprized of all the
movements in the routine phases of priestcraft, informed me that the
procession preceded by the palled bier indicated a judicial combat,
which was instituted for the final decision by the judgment of God of
right and wrong in argument, as well as the guilt and innocence of
persons accused of crimes. Farther exposition was anticipated by the
entrance of a herald into the arena, who proclaimed, with an
alheu,—“Whereas, it has occurred,—to the extreme mortification of his
holiness,—that certain of the consistorial incumbents,—to wit, the holy
brothers Bonefacio and Buenaventura, have differed in their estimate
concerning the preferred essentials of sufficient and efficacious grace;
giving rise to the implied accusations of perjury, with taunts, that in
the warmth of expression exceeded the bounds of Christian
forbearance,—it has been determined by our holy father, that they shall
have extended to them the privilege of deciding a question so important
to their respective personalities, and the general welfare of souls, by
the ordeal of battle. In referring the detection of the perjured to the
judgment of God, the doom pronounced upon the convicted,—in vindication
of the just and holy laws instituted by the gracious clemency of our
holy father,—it hath been adjudged that the respondents be awarded the
benefit of knight champions, who for the love and sustenance of truth,
in devotion to the holy mother church, shall offer, in willing
submission, their bodies with arms for the decision of the question at
issue, using their utmost exertion in skillful encounter, that the
perjured may suffer merited punishment.”

The instinctive elements of humanity, like those which hold irruptive
sway from excessive accumulation in the earth’s interior, involve
anticipatory emotions of coming events. As, with the vacuum lull of the
forest that heralds the tornado; or, in the ocean calm, the bubbling
ripple crests which warn the volantaph of an approaching tempest; and
the dread silence that precedes the earthquake’s convulsive throes,—the
congregated multitude in counterpart had anticipated from the dirge the
startling premonition of some horrible gratification. From suppressed
respiratory gaze, unbroken except from an occasional Jewish croak, or
belching eructations from uncircumcised barbarians unaccustomed to the
suppressed control of reverential awe, the multitude, when the cause for
the sombre prelude was announced, burst the bonds of thoughtless silence
with deafening shouts for champions. The knights no less prompt offered
their service in mass, so that it became necessary for the interdicted
prelates to make selection of champions; in aid the heralds sounded
their call for a parade procession. As the squires brought in the
knightly equipments for their masters, the grooms led in the panoplied
war-roaches. When mounted the knights passed in review before the
consistorial pavilion. Exposed to the searching glances of spiritual and
temporal criticism they exerted all their dexterity in the management of
the roach-steeds and in the changing exercise of sword and spear to win
the favor of an election. Cardinal Bonefacio had with other
accomplishments acquired the reputation of being an expert roach
equitator, as well as a skillful artist in the use of arms, in his
temporal days. Buenaventura, his polemical adversary, aware of these
advantages, and his own defective judgment, sought by the chicanery of
his eyes to detect Cardinal Bonefacio’s preference, as in casting lots
he had won the first choice, which would enable him to secure the
champion of his opponent’s election. Among the knights there was one
from Tipperary, a county shire in the Island of Hibernation, a
dependency of Albion. This knight bore the title and name of Sir O’Ham
Ill Tong, of Scythio-Mongolian extraction. His brogue, and quaint
peculiarities of speaking in reversion, had attracted the tribune’s
attention, who was familiar with the derivation of his sept and lingual
idiom. He informed me that the literal meaning of his name was bad pork,
as it was customary with the Mongolian tribes to name those outlawed
from the hereditary cognomen of Kan Avan, or John, the son of the tribe,
with the cause of defection; which in his case might have been inherited
from ancestral resemblance, exchanging a bad article for good, or
stealing from his own tribe, as each of these crimes were punished with
bestowal of a name referring to the cause of attaint. His squire still
bore the tribal name, and for economy enacted the part of roach-groom.
This unique pair had attracted mirthful attention, and were the especial
favorites of the gods; the knight for correspondence with name, and Kan
Avan, his squire, for successful apish imitation of his master’s traits;
but both were so blinded with boastful vanity that even the scoffing
plaudits of the hinds ministered to its inflation. Cardinal Bonefacio,
being in disposition humorously inclined, could not divert his eyes from
the combined comicalities of their forms, pretensions, and clownish
movements. This marked interest at once decided the choice of Cardinal
Buenaventura. The wisdom of his selection was confirmed when the
generosity of Bonefacio suggested a more prudent election. Finding that
his colleague’s determination could not be changed, Bonefacio made Don
Bacalao his proxy, a Spanish knight who depended upon his dignity and
purity of lineage for success.

The cardinals having selected their champions, the lists were cleared
for the encounter, the beadles remaining to enforce the ritualistic
regulations. When the champions had assumed their positions, the barrier
gates were opened to admit the judicial brotherhood, who while chanting
their dirge proceeded to the centre of the arena and there deposited the
bier with its palled coffin, upon which had been placed a skull and
crossed bones of the human leg; over these as a dividing barrier the two
champions would be required to thrust their lances in closing career.
With this sable wall interposed, gravely premonitory with its relict
escutcheon, of sepulchral entertainment, Sir O’Ham’s face became
blanched, while the point of his spear directed heavenward described in
trembling movements a geometrical medley of circles with acute
triangles, as if engaged in calculating his chances of being elected a
tenant. The face of the Spaniard, more intelligent in expression, but
with deeper set fanatical lines, became overshadowed with fitful gloom
as he intently watched the ominous proceedings of the cortege. Even the
“gods” became silent with awe, in the presence of these foreboding
evidences of the end of mortality, involuntarily crossing their
foreheads and breasts with their fingers, as if to exorcise inevitable
fate. With the sound of the trumpets for the charge, the perturbation of
Sir O’Ham Ill Tong caused him to lose all control over himself and
spear, the latter in its fall to rest encountered the beadle’s head. The
blow was as free from the attaint of misdirection as it would have been
in the most skillful hands with the intention of producing the prostrate
result which it accomplished with the beadle. Although reduced to an
attitude of supplication, the victim of this mishap gave voice to
language widely at variance with the formulistic words used in Catholic
prayer. The beadle’s uncontrollable anger, and the increased confusion
of the champion, were of that humorous cast that renders mirth
irresistible, even under the impression of imposing solemnities, and the
restraining presence of those high in worshipful authority. In the
present instance, the pope was constrained to turn his head aside, but
his jowls shook and vibrated with jellied throbs that absolved even the
ladies, in the opposite pavilion, from the painful effort that would
have been required to conceal their mirthful emotions. The contagious
effect of boisterous laughter would have made irresistible headway with
the democratic elements of the godhead, but for the timely forethought
of the heralds, and the mettlesome impatience of the roaches, which
seconded with spirit the trumpet’s sound to charge. This the disgraced
beadle, with aching head, encouraged with a smart kick applied to a
sensitive part of O’Ham’s steed, causing it to start in its career with
an impetus that nearly unseated the worthy knight. Losing his stirrups
at the start the champion of Cardinal Buenaventura was obliged to
exercise all the presence of mind within his reach to restrain his fiery
roach from the dreaded encounter over the sable barrier; but fed at the
table of the Giga pontiff, restraint was impossible. Notwithstanding the
mad career of the high-fed roach, the knight with instinctive bravery
clutched his spear, and would have directed it with his usual skill to
the barret bars of Don Bacalao’s visor (recorded from his after
confession) had not the doomed (by after intention) knight anticipated
delayed design by the then present achievement of the same purpose with
successful effect; his spear’s point catching in the slits of O’Ham’s
visor he was hurled from his saddle a perjured man. His dangling spear
having wounded one of the judicial brotherhood that was added to the sum
of his day’s disgrace. Hisses, and contemptuous words of scorn saluted
the knight’s highly sensitive instincts from the mouths of high and low
degree when raised from his grovelings in the dust. To his discomfiture
was added the pains and penalties of knightly disgrace that condemned
his memory to infamy. Stripped of his armor by the beadles and grooms,
his spurs were hacked from the heels of his brogans. The tribune informs
me, that the name of the shoe is derived from the resemblance of its
creak to the Hibernian’s brogue. His roach steed, and squire,
participating in their master’s disgrace, were stripped of their
housings, but the former, apparently less sensitive in the appreciation
of his perjured condition, shook his blattidial wings with relieved
satisfaction, in lively contrast with the crooning wirra of his
companions. Then the three unfortunates were reduced as nearly to a
state of nature as the regulations of modesty permitted; the knight and
squire were haltered and placed upon the roach in a reversed position
and led from the arena amid the jeers of the multitude. The heartless
lack of pitying sympathy shown to the knight and his companions in
misfortune, aroused in our breasts emotions akin to indignation, but we
were again warned that we must not be prodigal with our kindly instincts
unless we wished to bankrupt them in utter disgust. Finding ourselves
constantly astray with the kindly yearnings of our inexperience in the
ways of worldly human instinct, we resolved to set aside the integrity
of our home impressions and abide by the direction of the Coliseo’s
example.

When the judicial ordeal closed, his holiness and consistorials left the
lists, that the people might enjoy their more profane amusements free
from the embarrassment imposed by their sacred presence, Cardinal
Buenaventura showing especial chagrin in being obliged to acknowledge
that effectual grace was not sufficient. The only representatives of the
priesthood remaining in the lists, who were not in the actual charge of
souls, were abbots and priors, with their canons of inferior calibre,
none of the Episcopal diocesans venturing to remain, although many cast
longing and critical glances to the appointments and bearings of the
knights through whose arrayed ranks they filed out of the lists on their
way to the vatican. The judicial brotherhood with their dismal bar to
joviality, and prisoners, disappeared within the gates of their
sanctuary.

The relief from the combined influence of the departed became
immediately manifest in the bantering freedom of all the gradations of
the assemblage; the clergy leading in the display of wit and gallantry,
but in a manner that frequently trenched upon the laity’s interested
sense of propriety. _The Joust_, from the delay occasioned by the
judicial combat, was now hastened, and the two processions were but
shortly housed before the first two lances were splintered. Count San
Pietro Marceroni, Captain of the Papal Guard, was the Italian’s Mouthpat
champion, and had succeeded in gaining a slight advantage in bearing off
the cockscomb that surmounted the helmet of Count Saint Poll de Parrote,
a French knight of great renown, as an adept in the chivalric
accomplishments of the age, as well as in the gastronomic art, having
been elected by the Pope chief of cuisine, esteemed the most important
office within his gift. Between the two knights there had been a warm
rivalry for the favors of Princessa Idolisima Canonica, a niece of the
pope, after his election to the Papal chair. As upon the result of the
encounter the pope’s favor depended, the friends of Count Parrote,
confident in his successful prowess, had presented him the helmet he
wore as a presage of victory. This was surmounted with a cock’s head,
neck, wings, tail, and comb, all in exultant elevation, as if sounding
the highest octave in the clarion notes of victory. His countrymen, with
still greater assurance, had caused the artist to execute a wreath
composed of hearts, spear-heads, and trefoil, worked in gold; this
circled and was attached to the cock’s crest. When this was borne off by
the well directed aim of Count Marceroni’s spear point, I will
acknowledge that I felt an instinctive thrill of elation. Still if his
signal skill had resulted otherwise than in a bloodless victory,
notwithstanding the flippant presumption of Count Parrote, I am assured
that I should have felt a tremor of dismayed horror. In sustaining the
reputation he had won Count Marceroni successively overthrew the
stalwart son of Baron Biermywitzs, a young knight with an excellent
German reputation for capacity. Baron Brainoff, a Muscovite with a heavy
animal cast of countenance, theoretically accomplished in the Tartar
tactics of thrust, run, and come again, which he displayed; but the
arena was too contracted for their successful evolution, for he was
overtaken and overthrown, his roach participating in his fall. His last
encounter was with Baron von Wolfenstein, an Austrian knight with a
powerful phlegmatic physique of vis inertia. At the start he placed his
lance in rest over the carapace of his roach with the hopeful
expectation of finding his opponent impaled thereon after the course had
been run. When, from a defect in his calculation of his foe’s
condescension, he found himself a prostrate companion with his steed, he
did not exhibit in his movements the least symptom of chagrin, although
saluted with the derisive jests of the democratic plebs, who appeared to
enjoy with intense satisfaction the privilege of jousting their
superiors with revilings, when temporarily reduced to their own
groveling level. After a leisurely survey of his situation he slowly, by
easy stages, regained his upright position without the proffered aid of
the beadles; then with sluggish movements unlaced his beaver, and
raising his visor, showed a face wreathed in torpid smiles that seemed
to have had their rise from the recognition of the scoffing taunts as
plaudits for the execution of some knightly achievement that had escaped
his memory. This innocent act of mazy stupidity was taken by the
spectators as a witty assumption in burlesque of victory, and vividly
impressed with his supposed humorous aptness they made the welkin echo
with their shouts of applause, until he had bowed himself out of the
lists. Count Marceroni, by this democratic misapprehension of cause and
effect, was completely robbed of the merited zest due to his adroit
exhibition of skill in the precise use of weapons, and the Austrian
Baron, the least worthy of his antagonists, was established as the prime
favorite of the worshipful gods.

Turning to the tribune a look of inquiry, I observed with surprise that
his face, for the first time, was suffused with a pleased expression. In
explanation, he said that the scene I had just witnessed was a truthful
exposition of the source from which a majority of the Gigas and
Animalculans derived their reputations for wisdom, wit, and invention;
in truth, he continued, musingly, you can take it as a fair
demonstration of the substance of their living realities. Embracing the
opportunity, he again advised us not to let our Manatitlan natures
interpose their sensitive perceptions for the gratuitous bestowal of
praise or pity, as they would serve to mar the relish of comical effects
afforded by the hap-hazard novelties in store from the heterogeneous
imitations of Giga habits and customs.

While the “fun” provoked by the suppositious humor of the Austrian
baron, Wolfenstein, was at its height, the heralds announced the melée.
The arena, in this promiscuous scene of antagonism, was so completely
filled with knights and their roach steeds that the space between the
challengers and challenged only afforded a limited movement, short
spears having been substituted for the longer and more cumbersome couch-
lance, but the favorite weapons were clubs, swords, and battle-axes. As
the combatants were so nearly in contact with each other when unroached,
they discarded all weapons save the short dagger, and it was fearful to
behold the fierce blows dealt with it, for instead of men the combatants
appeared like enraged beasts who used knives, and other weapons, in the
place of claws. But as the horrible scene progressed, we were often
obliged to turn our faces aside from dizzy faintness. The roaches
imitating the fierce example of their riders became infuriate, seizing
with their mandibles opposing legs and antennæ, so that many were
disabled by mutilating attacks both in front and rear, for in the melée
they showed as little regard for honorable usage of the parts exposed as
their riders. It was gratifying to see that a majority of the ladies’
heads were bowed down, with their hands tightly pressed upon their ears,
and it was long after all the evidences of the bloody fray had been
removed that they again assumed an upright position. This evidence of
sensitive repugnance, on the part of women personally known to them,
produced a congratulatory revulsion with the Coliseos, who hailed it as
a favorable omen, with the hope that its influence had turned aside the
fanatical intentions that meditated the sacrifice of the kidnapped tits
upon the altars of superstition. In the enthusiasm of the moment, my
mentor exclaimed: “I firmly believe that there is not a Giga or
Animalculan mother in Italy, who, in freedom from bias, would refuse the
privilege of having their children educated in accordance with the
Manatitlan system!”

After the sand had been renewed in the lists to cover the unsightly
stains, a light and joyous rondalen was sounded, and the commingled
challengers and challenged were seen issuing from their tents in the
wooded bosque, and mounting fresh roaches, newly caparisoned with gay
trappings, they again entered the lists. When the roachavalcade reached
the barrier vestibule, the heralds proclaimed: “Count San Pietro
Marceroni, the elected king champion of the lists, in whom is vested
absolute authority, and honors that will remain inviolate, until in an
approved tourney a worthy successor can be found. Salute your champion
king!” The trumpets then sounded the crowning tan-tarra, while the
count, assisted by twelve knights-of-honor, dismounted and was invested
with the kingly robes of love and honor, then kneeling upon a richly
wrought carpet he was crowned by the master of ceremonies with the
consecrated chaplet of Mars. As he rose the vast assemblage saluted him
with the exclamations: “Long live the noble Count San Pietro Marceroni,
king champion of the lists!” the mouthed concussions of boisterous
adulation causing the canopies to vibrate with the echoing sound of
noisy and noisome breath.

Again the braying of trumpets and clash of cymbals overpowered the
tumultuous shouts of the multitude, and when sufficiently hushed for a
single voice to be heard, the grand master gave utterance in
proclamation to the maxim: “It is not good for man to rule alone! And,
in obedience to well approved custom, and the chivalric gallantry of
brave hearts, it hath been adjudged that after his own installation the
king champion shall, from his own choice, elect a queen of love and
beauty to preside in public at feast and festival during the term of his
regality. In accordance with this imperative decree our salutations
await his choice!”

Mounting his richly caparisoned blattidean roach with a graceful vault,
Count Marceroni caused him to execute a variety of changes in pace of
the most difficult posing gaits imaginable; and, while passing from a
demi-amble to a demi-cavolt, raised from its cushion in the hands of his
squire the chaplet designed for his queen upon the point of his lance,
allowing it to rest in loop upon its cross-check. This adroit feat was
greeted with shouts of applause, which stimulated him to enact a great
variety of euphuistic attitudes,—a species of pantomimic male coquetry
then much in vogue with the Giga nobility,—which the tribune said would
express, with the scenes of the day, how ritualistically void in
enactment, the exemplar and imitator were for the real attainment of
happy impressions. There was certainly for the instinctive worshipper,
much to admire in the studied adroitness of the count’s acquirements, as
they bespoke disciplined perseverance; but when I reflected that his
manly capabilities had been expended upon frivolous expertness to grace
a brutal pastime, I found cause for self-reprobation for the sympathy of
my admiration. Of the count’s predilection all seemed to be aware, but,
withal, held their breathing subdued with expectation to gather force
for a new outburst of applause when his acceptance was confirmed.
Arriving in front of the Princessa Idolisima’s pavilion, by the longest
circuit, with doublings, that the effect of his euphuistic mimicries
might be fully appreciated, he with an obeisance that enveloped the
caput-shield of his roach with the plumes of his casque, petitioned with
his voice; “Will the most noble Princessa Idolisima Canonica deign to
share the brief rule of her humble subject, Count San Pietro Marceroni,
as the queen of love, beauty, and harmony?”

With a blush of equivocal import, she nodded her acceptance. Then, while
her eyes were yet concealed under the latticed veil of their long,
silken lashes, the count, with infinite grace, conveyed the coronet with
a “_coup de lance_” to its proper position on her head without
disturbing a ringlet with its steel. Plaudits in salvos rose in
deafening succession with the successful accomplishment of this
dexterous feat, which bespoke long and patient practice with a living
model. The princessa represents through ——, her uncle, the pope, one of
the original Mouthpat families of Greenpat, with blood variations from
European ingraft, which had produced a remarkable improvement, by
blending and mellowing with distance the animal traits into an
expression, that might with propriety be termed instinctive
idealization. Her eyes are black with a shadowy impression of azure
softening the snaky brilliancy of the Italian into a sympathetic hue,
free from the luric reflection of vengeful passions. When free from
exciting emotions, they beam forth an expression of calm dignity, above
the sway of lust, vanity, and envy, that gave birth to the cruel
frivolities of the day, which she evidently patronizes from compulsion.
The composition, in outline, of her other features, corresponds in
expression with her eyes, bespeaking the struggling emergence of her
thoughts from sensual control, although, from relative association,
obliged to conform to the usages that hold ruling sway. But, withal,
there is apparent to our eyes an underlying consciousness of purity and
goodness, with her responsibility for their cultivation and preservation
for transmission. We were so strongly impressed with her longing desire
for more substantial attainments than the illusive vanities with which
she was surrounded, that we could not refrain from giving voice to our
thoughts, which brought a succession of grateful flushes to the
tribune’s face, foretokening an interest of deeper import than our
observation had previously detected. Frankly acknowledging the
predisposition his emotions indicated he begged to be excused from an
explanation while subject to so many counter enactments. A request that
delicacy conceded without voiced assurance.

While the northern portion of the lists was in the process of
transformation into a sectional amphitheatre for the exhibition of an
ant and tarantula fight,—which unfortunately our position
overlooked,—Count Marceroni led his queen with her maids of honor into a
pavilion erected for her reception at the extreme southern portion of
the arena, which in construction had received his special supervision.
When this, after occupation, was exposed to view, the splendor of its
appointments in tinsel adornment received the prayerful adoration of the
assemblage. Seated in front of the pavilion on its extended platform,
just without the shadow of its dais, were two celebrated improvisorial
troubadours of Provence, a small kingdom in the south of France. These
were to contend in verse and song for prizes to be awarded by the queen
of beauty, love, and harmony, to the adjudged successful superiority of
the competitors in their varied styles of adventurous composition. A
laurel wreath, or chaplet, had been prepared for the queen’s crowning
disposal, with the title of laureate; the recipient holding with the
emblematic token the conferred privilege of supremacy in his vocation
through all the Animalculan courts of Christendom, until a greater star
should appear in the musical firmament, for his eclipse, under the like
sanction of infallible approval. When the congregation were fully
separated for the suitable enjoyment of their tastes in the contrasted
extremities of the lists,—the northern having the relative preponderance
of eight to one of the southern audience,—a screen was drawn to
intercept the boisterous freedom of the borealian sphere.

When the arrangements were fully completed, a maiden herald pronounced
in silvery tones, “Alheu!” Then Penny Song with tuneful rebeck essayed
his overture with reverent eyes upturned in conceptive supplication to
the ruling goddess of love and harmony. To the symphony of murmuring
strings in soft prelude to a rippling vision from the fountain of
musical poesy, he began his lay. Gradually, with the accession of
tributary streams, the current tones increased from the smooth still
voiced streamlet, until it merged into the rapid flow of the pebbly
brook, combining in sound cascade variations with rippling flow over
shallow inequalities into the bubbling depths of a pool, and from thence
onward with accumulating force into the deep volume of the river’s tide.
His voice in harmonious movement, tremulous with emotions reinvoked from
passionate recitative thought, rehearsed in song the Songs of Solomon.
Floating with the gilded wings of sensual taste, he fluttered over the
luscious lisp of lips united in their sip of virgin nectar from the
fount of instinctive love; at first chaste and free from guile in the
sparkling depths of pure desire,—but, anon, overflowing in contemplation
of the wide expanse of flowery meads, until satiated with its profligate
deviation from the legitimate boundaries of its course, he discovers
with lamentation the muddy defilement that exceeds his hopes of
purification. The song of the bard was wildly descriptive of the
longings of instinctive desire, until the hero had embraced with his
wisdom the fairest and loveliest daughters of Israel; then imbecile with
sensual gratification, he utters in his senility the wailing cry:
“Vanity, all is vanity!” and is gathered to his father’s dust. The
Princessa Idolisima, when the theme became expressive in sensual
development, perused attentively the countenances of all within reach of
her eyes, but seeing how eagerly engrossed they were with the voluptuous
portrayals of the poet bard, she with her selected companions bowed
their heads upon their hands with a sorrowful blush of shame. This mood
the bard observing, with the cause, introduced into his lamentations
strong reproof of himself for the selection of a subject so replete with
infamous suggestion. His sarcasm eloquent in self-condemnation aroused
the lascivious from their enraptured fancies, causing them, from shame,
to break the spell; and when they saw the princessa and her maids with
their heads bowed down, many from self-conviction gave evidence that
within themselves they felt the cause. Among these was Count San Pietro
Marceroni. The bard approved himself to be in the possession of
extraordinary imitative powers, for in his recitative picture he held
his hearers, of subject kind, entranced and as quickly aroused them with
the pungency of his addenda to the dirged lamentations of instinctive
wisdom, which would have startled the old hero to a more energetic
renunciation of his follies than the vapid exclamation, that his
experience was vanity and vexation of spirit.

The prelude of his competitor, Long Bow, was far more primitive in its
characteristic portrayal, being timed to irregular cadences of barbaric
import. The plaintive melody evoked by his touch from a stringed gourd
was in consonance with the strains of his song-theme, which depicted the
wild erratic love of savage life, but with far less instinctive merit in
recitative description than the love ditties of our Betongese neighbors.
At times the savage devotion of the lovers seemed to rise above the
animal instincts of sense, but only to sink deeper into the mythical
regions of hopeful doubt and despair. The butt at which Long Bow aimed
was a rhythmic measure adapted to savage nomenclature and the improvised
harmony of his gourd.

At the conclusion of his recitative the herald maiden called: “Give ear,
lovers of the gay and joyous science,—attend! while the queen of love,
beauty, and harmony approves with her commendation and award the happy
victor in the joust of improvised song?” The count champion offered his
hand to assist Idolisima in her descent to the balcony erected for the
bestowal of awards, but his bearing was abashed with the conscious self-
reflection of unworthiness. Idolisima, the queen, without assistance
stepped self-reliantly forward to her position, and then, without
ceremonious prelude, beckoned Long Bow to advance. Approaching he knelt
in accordance with the prescribed euphuistic forms of chivalric
obeisance in the presence of royalty. Placing the chaplet upon his brow
she bid him rise. Then calling Penny Song forward she presented him with
a zithern, the prize for the victor in song. The assemblage,
disappointed in her award of the laureate’s chaplet, were appeased by
the more substantial gift of the zithern to their favorite, recognizing
in its material worth a preference for their choice. This material
appeal to their senses opened the only avenue to their appreciation, but
their partial murmurs of approval were stilled by a look and disdainful
wave of the hand. When subjected to silence, she addressed Long Bow in
terms adapted to the usage of chivalry, although manifestly at variance
with expectation in expression:—

“Sir minstrel, we have esteemed your claims to the title of laureate as
best sustained in the court of fair ladies; inasmuch as you have been
pleased to acknowledge with our presence a comparative respect for
purity, by which, in fact, you have honored the worth of your own, as
well as the common name of mother. By endeavoring to exalt with your
muse the instinctive purity and fidelity of your savage heroine, the
fair High Water, you have admitted that it is our duty and privilege to
excel her untutored example. Still you have paid to ourselves and
maternity of our race an equivocal compliment for worth in your far-
fetched search for a heroine example of constancy in love and purity.
Notwithstanding the implied lack of living examples worthy of imitation
for the inspiration of your songful muse, we have preferred your savage
precedent to your competitor’s glossing embellishment of his hero’s
vices. With the hope that you may discover, during your adventurous
residence in Rome, an Animalculan or Giga representative that will honor
your mother’s sex with worth sufficient to inspire your commendation in
song, we would urge the undertaking as one deserving your earnest
attention. In the event of success it will save your muse many weary
pilgrimages into deserts and the waste places of earth for the
achievement of consolation from savage example. That the emprise may not
lack direction I will recommend you to visit the Manatitlan colony of
Coliseo. For with them, when convinced of your sincerity, you will find
in woman an exaltation of loving affection that will by far exceed your
highest conceptions.”

She would have extended her reproof, but as she was in the act of
addressing Penny Song, her commendation of the Manatitlan colonists
brought such an overwhelming “answering sibilation” in denouncement that
her brothers, in fear of an outbreak, hurried her away. The minstrels
during the excitement approached near enough for whispered
communication, the purport of which brought a smile of gratification to
her face. They then as a diversion commenced a roundelay of spirited
movement, uniting their voices in bluff concert to the sound of the
zithernas. As with enraged wild beasts when surprised with the sound of
music, the factious instincts of the spectators were stilled. The
Coliseos were rejoiced at the steadfast adherence of Idolisima to the
inculcations of her Manatitlan education, for the tribune now informed
us that she had served her full term in the Coliseo school, promising to
relate at a convenient season the cause of her apparent defection.

Although fearfully repugnant to our feelings, we turned our attention to
the democratic amusements in the northern sectional arena, within the
vestibule of the barriers; as you cautioned us of the necessity of
seeing for ourselves all the enactments that we recorded for advisorial
judgment. The “pit,” as it was aptly termed, was a miniature imitation
of the large arena of the lists; but the contestants for the honors of
mutilation were ants of the white, red, and black species, and their
antagonists were tarantulas distinguished by the same order and
variation of colors. But with naturally a higher object in view than
their human Animalculan and Giga exemplars, and controllers of the
lists, they fought without the artificial weapons that man’s superior
intelligence has devised for kindred destruction, in direct
controversion of the manifest designs of Creative intention. The
instinctive impressions of a blind man could have detected without the
aid of thought, the tangible distinctions that had furnished the motive
attractions for the northern and southern divisions of divertisement
predilections. The ants and the spiders engaged in mutilating encounter,
were to us, in reality, more attractive objects to contemplate in their
active ferocity, than their human spectator instigators, who combined
with controlling intelligence the visual evidences of the most abject
passions within sphere of animal and its reptile grade of expression.
The patrons of the southern pavilion had been held in dalliance with the
soft pleasures of amorous sensuality, which unopposed called forth the
highest expression of instinctive refinement; but the current tendencies
from multifarious indulgence were to the fall and deep whirlpool abyss
of passion, hate, and deadly revenge.

The colored specie distinctions of the ants and spiders appeared to be
as great a source of inveterate hatred between its caste
representatives, as the antagonisms of race in form. This necessitated
the separation of the white from the red, and the red from the black
ants, with a like disposal of the tarantulas from specie representatives
of opposing colors. The first encounter that we witnessed was between
white and red ants; the former being universally successful with the
odds of nine to one against them, and with the blacks twenty to one. The
cause of this concentration of multiplied ability in the white, to cope
with red and black antagonism, became soon apparent from their studied
aforethought for the serried separation and disposal of their foes
before they could effect united opposition. The deadly devices of the
whites to lure their foes, with the stupid blindness of the red and
black ants in accepting the proffered baits without consideration,
afforded a relative study for detecting the cause of the instinctive
superiority that rules with white humanity. When the whites in an
encounter against overwhelming odds had gained decisive advantage, the
cathedral bells of Saint Peter sounded from the chief dovecot beneath
our place of concealment; its funeral peals announced a new phase in the
strange enactments of the day, which had appeared to us so perverse as
sources of amusement that we were at no loss to discover the Giga creed
origin of hell. Fearful that the long-waited-for crisis was approaching,
our eyes were upon the alert.

As the yellow tints from the sun’s fading rays grew hazy with the
twilight heraldings of darkness, the folding doors of a large building
of ominous appearance opened, and from its portals issued a procession
of Dominican friars. In the midst of these inquisitorial representatives
of the human sacrificial order, were the unfortunate tits supported by
familiars of the Holy Office, with their limbs dragging helplessly upon
the pavement, and their heads half revolving on their shoulders without
the power of muscular control. The sight aroused the indignation of the
tribune and his companions, who with difficulty restrained us from
extending to them our immediate aid and sympathy. This was no slight
undertaking on their part, for we were unused to a knowledge of the
existence of such heartlessness, and would have adventured their
deliverance if the odds had been an hundred fold greater; but we finally
yielded to the wisdom of their discretion.

On the arrival of the sad cortege at the knight’s encampment they joined
the procession escort of the doomed, among which were Sir O’Ham Ill
Tong, and his squire, Kan Avan, who had been evidently condemned to the
stake. As the gates of the northern barrier were obstructed by the
occupation of the vestibule arena, in which the ants and spiders were
engaged in an instinctive joust, the inquisitors in deference to the
multitude awaited the decision of the contest; the latter, with
reverence, giving place for them to witness the result of the sportive
entertainment, as a prelude to their premeditated enactments. At the
conclusion of the melée fight of the ants, in which the white champions
had proved victorious, a large, whitish gray tarantula spider had been
“pitted” against five mottled white ants, both parties having been
subjected to a training abstinence from food to increase their ferocity.
For a time the battle had been equally sustained, but a bold venture
cost two of the ants their lives; in the feat the tarantula was maimed
with the partial rupture of a carapace and the loss of the distal joints
of two legs. Two of the remaining ants having a firm mandibular hold on
the round carapace leg, the greatest excitement prevailed among the
spectators, wagers being bantered between high and low; all distinctions
of caste, for the time being, were banished by the talismanic greed for
gold and silver. It soon became evident the auto-da-fe rites would be
deferred until the result of the ant-fight was determined, for the order
of procession was broken, the familiars with their human burdens
crowding to gain a favorable position to witness the closing struggle.
While the ants gnawed and swayed in hold upon the tarantula’s leg, he
struggled to bring them within reach of his mandibles. The partial
success of the assailants and assailed was greeted with vociferous
shouts by the wager partisans, unabashed by the presence of the
inquisitorial brotherhood and archiepiscopal dignitaries of the church.
The tribune sadly reminded us, that the brutality of the scene was the
tested ægis of democratic equality based upon individual or associate
physical strength adroitly used,—chance advantages, or in massed
subjection to the rule of selfish partisanship, as with ants in
attacking the spider whose habits and interests in life interfered in no
way with their own. But as you perceive, the hinds are so stupid in the
dullness of their perceptions, that with the clear analogy of the cause
and result of their own condition, in demonstration from the arbitrary
power of physical strength that captured and forced the ants and spider
into antagonistic collision, they fail to detect in the caste orders of
priestcraft and knighthood the same motor influence in mental
combination.

With our attention called so directly to the resemblance,—from the
pitiable condition of the poor tit victims, who had been tortured into
the vestibule of death, and were awaiting the ordeal of fire to recall
from their bodies the vital spark,—we could not fail to admire the
comprehensive quickness of our Coliseo cousins’ detective acumen for
analyzing the relations and gradations of instinctive responsibility.
Indeed, it would be impossible for you to imagine a more discordant or
disgusting scene, or a baser use of language than these bloodthirsty
humans used at every disjuncture effected by the combatants. That you
may obtain an inkling of this pandemonic scene of instinctive madness, I
will adventure a sketch.

Prominent among the representatives of foreign nations was a Scotch
abbot of the abbey of Saint Maythedielscratch-me on the Tweed. In person
and language he was tall and lank. Although engaged in “amusement” with
an English prior, the incumbent of Goddamnmee on the Tyne, just over the
border, they “staked” fearful invectives with their metallic coin. But
the English canon was evidently no favorite, and required all the
bluffness he had attained by a long course of dominant rule over a
submissive brotherhood, as well as a full purse of tithes, for he was
bantered with wagers on every side. But with bellowing disdain in the
short and curt Durham dialect, he was ready with horned alternatives to
oppose all comers. Chief among his secondary challengers, with coined
words, was the abbe of Mortdieu, who mingled frothy gibes with his wager
temptations. The ants were at length vanquished, to the great chagrin of
the English abbot’s debtors, who tried all sorts of evasions to escape
payment. Oncleslydenbet, the German prior of the priory of
Shufflehausen, repudiated the payment of his forfeited wager in the
concise terms, “Not a bit of it!” The Irish abbot of Fivewounds said,
“To be sure I have bet and lost, but it was the understanding that I
should never pay unless I won!” The Dutch incumbent of Dunderandblixen,
the Welsh of Sweatmyleeks, and French paid theirs; the first with
fearful imprecations and sputterings, the second with an abundant flow
of perspiration, and the last with strings of sacres.

But for your injunction, I should have withheld the incidents of a scene
so horribly repulsive in its ferocious combinations of speaking
inhumanity. Especially as it implies distracted attention from the
wretched condition of the dislocated tits; but in direction we submitted
to the ulterior intention of the Coliseos. The tribune, whose aid you
will recognize, said, that you required an exact index of the real
condition of the Giga and Animalculan races under the instinctive rule
of the stomach and senses, that you might compare the evidences with
those of the first falcon era, to judge of the cycle changes. The task,
with his assistance, is by no means pleasant, as with increasing
familiarity the scenes of brutality become more repulsive, so that you
need have no fears that they will affect us otherwise than as a ferment
to clarify the instincts of our bodies from corrupt humors and
indwelling passions. Much time was exhausted in wrangling before the ant
circus was removed to admit the papal and inquisitorial trains into the
lists. The arrival of the former, while the battle of the ants and
spider was pending, was exceedingly fortunate for Cardinal Buenaventura,
as by wagering with the pope an equivalent, with the spider for his
champion, he was exorcised of his perjury, and by remitting to his
holiness certain pecuniary obligations, received absolution to date. Our
sympathy for the tarantula’s loss of his carapace legs, with the extreme
division of the fourth, was not strongly excited, as in excess of his
pope contemporary’s alleged stigmatic attributes of infliction and
redemption, from instinctive woes, he in reality possesses the
“miraculous” power of material reproduction of lost limbs.

The arena of the lists had been rearranged for the final enactment, and
furnished with stakes and faggots for the sacrificial ordeal of fire, as
a purgatorial agent for the purification of the body from heretical
sins. These altars were raised between the two pavilions; and the
ladies’, I am obliged with sadness to relate, was filled with
representatives of the sex, yet they were of a class whose
gratifications were solely dependent upon the organs of sense. During
the converting labors of the confessors with the San Benitos the
inquisitorial monks, dignitaries of the church, and knights, chanted a
grand high mass to ritualistic ceremonial accompaniments. This was
pronounced to be more affecting, by the occupants of the ladies
pavilion, from the sobbing wails and lamentations of the doomed Irish
knight, Sir O’Ham Ill Tong, and his squire, Kan Avan, who unceasingly
proclaimed their innocence from perjury after they were tied to the
stakes, thus adding contumacy to the ordeal and decisions of the judges.
As their winnings disgraced the order of knighthood they were gagged
with clouts.

When these preliminary preparations were nearly completed, the tribune
gave the longed for signal of rescue. In a twinkling our Manatitlans
were in the midst of the inquisitors and ecclesiastics, upsetting them
in a confused pile with the knights. We liberated the tits by the time
the Coliseo aids arrived, who placed the rescued in the arms of their
relatives. The panic we created could not have been greater if we had
been gigas instead of giantescoes. The women, who had looked calmly on
the preparations for human sacrifice by the tortures of a slow fire,
screamed and fainted at our appearance, their attendant knights
surrendering without opposition. The pope and cardinals were in as much
fear as the unsanctified until the tribune made known the source from
whence we came. Then relieved from his apprehensions of bodily danger,
he commenced crossing himself furiously, muttering the while anathemas
against the Coliseos and their followers for the sacrilegious invasion,
and interference with the sacred offices of the church. Counting upon
our intimidation through the enactment of prestigious mummeries, he
would have left with his satellites; but the tribune detained him by
laying his hand upon his shoulder with an inflection that made the burly
little head of the church understand that it had forced a crisis, from
which mumbling ritual cant could not extricate it without the assurance
of a strict regard for the personal independence of all Animalculans
from religious restrictions. We will give you the terms of the tribune’s
injunction:—

“Now Canonicus, that there may be no more acts of treachery on your
part, or through the instigations of those subject to your direction, I
shall dictate to you terms in behalf of our Manatitlan colonies that you
must keep inviolate, for if they are infringed upon in the least degree
we shall hold you and your associates personally responsible. We have
heretofore offered you good will, but you have taken advantage of it to
impose upon our communities and inflict personal injuries upon our
adherents; showing that you are alike destitute of gratitude, and the
disposition that inclines to honorable and just reciprocation. In the
first place, you are to respect the privileges of all claiming a desire
for our protection, whether an Animalculan of Mouthpat birth, or of
other nationality. In the second place we shall hold you personally
responsible for any acts of cruelty perpetrated by Animalculans under
your control upon animal or insect; and for the honor of instinctive
humanity we especially interdict all barbarous amusements between man
and man. Fortunately, communication has again been opened with our
motherland, and by the timely arrival of our cousins, we have been able
to avail ourselves of their counsel when most needed. From the
enactments of to-day, which have borne witness to the steadfast goodness
of your daughter, Idolisima, in her adherence to the inculcations of her
Coliseo education, we shall hereafter require that all the Animalculan
children of Rome shall from henceforth be submitted to our censorial and
educational charge. We are aware that in assuming the charge we
undertake an immense and arduous responsibility from the fecundity of
your animal propensities. But in time our inauguration will effect the
substitution of improved quality for quantity with an affectionate
compensation that with cultivation and reciprocation you have the means
of realizing in fatherly association with your daughter.”

Here he was interrupted by Sir O’Ham Ill Tong,—from whose mouth the
clout had been removed,—with the ejaculation: “An sure, by our holy
mother, what your honor is plased to say is all gospel truth, and by the
same token, if there is any more, I believe it on my shoul! But if your
honor will be so obbleeging as to order one of your giants to remove
this gorget that binds my throat to the stake, and set me free, if yees
have closed what ye are going to say, I can hear the rest more
comfortably, and ye’ll save from fire as good a Christian as ever was
burnt for pargary,—an for the life of me, I can’t just see how that can
be, for I niver spoke a blissed word in the matter at all!”

This characteristic wordy appeal of the Irishman was complied with on
the moment, and when released he fell on his knees at the feet of the
tribune, invoking upon his head the blessings of all the saints in the
Irish calendar, offering to serve him to the end of his days, on foot,
or on roachback, for nothing at all save fair wages, hursts,
perquisites, pickings, and the run of the kitchen, and sich likes! The
ludicrous fall, in the use of words, from knightly inflation caused a
smile notwithstanding the embarrassments imposed by our interruption.
But the flow of his tongued gratitude to the ascendant party, having
reference to future benefits, could with difficulty be stayed. When
accomplished he was advised to return with all speed to the place of his
birth before a worse evil befell his body than purification by fire.

The pope and his cardinals, while subject to the tribune’s
reprehensions, became as servile in their bearing as they had before
been arrogant. The pope’s offer of entertainment for the night we could
not accept, after witnessing the barbarous proceedings of the day, as we
preferred the protection of our silicoth tapas under the cornice to the
lair hospitality of human wolves. After the crowd dispersed a messenger
was despatched to apprise the Coliseans of the successful result of our
enterprise, with the desire that a falcon might be sent for us at early
dawn. In accordance with our request a falcon appeared with the earliest
light on the following morning, and on alighting, to our great surprise,
Idolisima Canonica, in company with the tribune’s parents and other
representatives of Coliseo to the howdah’s full capacity for
entertainment, descended to receive our salutations. It appeared, from
the relation of the tribune’s sister, that Idolisima after leaving the
lists had sought protection under the escort of Penny Song and Long Bow,
at the coliseum, well knowing that the ties of daughter and sister would
not save her from the dungeons of the Inquisition, recently built by the
pope, her uncle. From the greeting she gave the tribune, it required no
prompting of speech to apprise us that a stronger motive than fear of
the dungeons caused her to seek an asylum with her foster guardians of
childhood.

Without teasing our curious interest in her welfare she appealed to the
tribune: “Your Manatitlan cousins, Novuotus, would scarcely feel
satisfied with your interest in my behalf, if I should allow you to hold
me silently exculpated from your abiding confidence in the wisdom that
dictated our betrothal. As we are united, yet single, in the fulfillment
of our marital alliance, I am anxiously desirous of having the
affectionate sanction of their approbation, which could not be conceded
if they thought me capable of participating otherwise than by form, in
the cruel enactments of yesterday. In speaking, it is my wish to
vindicate myself from voluntary conformity with the chivalric usages in
which I engaged, as they were then, as they ever have been, sadly
repugnant to my conceptions of love and affection, which vividly impress
me with the reality of an existence independent of the body’s mortality.
That your cousins may realize in what measure they are entitled to
bestow upon me their lenity and sympathy, I will relate to them the
cause that influenced my introduction to the guardianship of your
people. Of my ancestral origin, I am certain that the events of
yesterday will better inform you than I am able from my own knowledge.
In my fourth year, when my perceptions were only advanced in the bud
sufficient for impression, without enlisting the maturing aid of
thoughtful judgment derived from comparison, my father, mother, and two
brothers, became very sick with the plague, alike destructive to the
Giga and Animalculan races. The harrowing scenes of bereavement daily
recounted in my presence aroused impressions of fear for myself, and
when my parents became sick, I added anxiety to my aunt’s
responsibility, to whose sole charge we had been left by the servants
and neighbors. One day, despairing and hopeless, my aunt had enfolded me
in her arms, and while wofully lamenting threatened desolation from the
death of my parents and brother, I was trying to solace her with
endearments, my arms were around her neck, with my lips to her ear and
face turned backward, when the door softly opened and my voice was
stilled by the surprise of my eyes at the entrance of a very large and
beautiful woman. [Here Idolisima fondly embraced, with caresses, the
neck of the Doschessa of Romelia.] My silence and fixed attention
attracted my aunt’s eyes to the door, and when she discovered the
stranger, who appeared to be well known to her, she was much abashed
that she had been surprised in useless lamentation. This made me gladly
hope that the visitor was an angel sent to help us; so, growing bold
with the feeling of hope, I gently withdrew myself from my aunt’s
embrace and approached the stranger imploring her aid for my parents and
brothers! In a moment I was in her arms; then I became so quickly
changed, I no longer feared, for her voice and touch made me feel so
secure that I was sure she came from heaven to help us. But I have since
experienced that she came from a far better place beyond the reach of
gold and its selfish attractions. Urging my aunt to take new courage,
she went out, still holding me in her arms, and meeting a censor, with
others of her people, she returned, and soon our house became quite
changed, for they brought with them your clothes that remain clean, so
that from being dismal and sad everything looked nice and cheerful. Then
mother reviving, she also knew the angel, who asked her if she could
take me to her Coliseo home? Oh, how gladly my mother smiled with her
whispered yes, so faintly and pleadingly grateful in earnest expression
it has ever been present since. Striving to speak, my mother fell asleep
without breathing, but still she smiled, until it paled to a shadow in
the moonlight, then we were taken to the Coliseo, for my aunt required
rest, where we were bathed and dressed with the care of so many sweet
faced persons, that we became quite bewildered with love and slept. In
the morning we were wakened with sunlight and song, so harmonious with
gladness, my aunt touched me to be sure, for we both thought alike. I
was placed in school where there were so many that in love we were
counted as one, for we were so united in affection that tears of
vexation and sadness never flowed. Then as I grew in years, I learned to
grow emulous in the personal requirements of purity, and with the care
of myself, was able to assist others, for the grateful meed of love.
Much more I could say, but I feel that you do not require it. When my
father became my uncle, Pope Innocent I., I had reached my eighteenth
year, and had been betrothed to Novuotus, and we were enjoying the
hospitality of my foster parents, the Dosch and Doschessa of Romelia,
during our term of probation, when my father, after his election,
demanded that my aunt and myself should be restored to his care. The
Dosch, after a long consultation with his advisors, for he was very
sorry to part with us, concluded that it was best for us to return. This
was a very sad decision for us, but we were assured that if we found
ourselves unhappy from being unable to do good, we could come back. We
were then taken to my ‘uncle’s’ temporal court, but none were truly glad
to see us, for we were strangers, even to my father, for he would not
accept the monthly invitation to visit me at the Coliseo school. Yet we
were constantly surrounded with a throng of servants and people of
condition, so that with them, we were mere puppets, and felt very
unclean, for we could do nothing for ourselves. But all were very
profuse in the utterance of complimentary formalities, which made us
feel like exiles from real affection. The first process to which we were
subjected was purification from heresy; in preparation our silicoth
garments were removed, and our persons were redressed with woven stuffs,
that in their newness smelt animally earthy, and soon became irksome in
weight, and rankly unendurable, notwithstanding they had been sprinkled
with holy water at the time we were baptized. Then, my aunt was made, or
created, queen of Rome, and I was christened Princess Idolisima Canonica
by the same process. A few days since my aunt escaped and went back to
unite with her Coliseo affections; since than I have been closely
guarded, as I had attempted to leave with her, but was foiled by
accident. So with my father turned uncle, I became the puppet, or bone
and flesh of contention for the strongest and best trained brute in the
lists, and was seemingly obliged to conform to the dictated usages; but
with the determination to escape if an opportunity offered. In this
relation I have traced my childish impressions in the language I have
been accustomed to impart them to my loved school associates; to remodel
them to suit my present perceptions would detract from memorial pledges
of affection. That you saw me in the lists yesterday, came not through
my own volition, as you will concede; but perhaps, from a wise wish on
the part of the Dosch and his advisors to test in what I lacked for the
power of resisting the wordy flatteries and material vanities to which I
would be exposed in the papal court of my uncle. For I had exceeded in
years your period of matriculation, as my instinctive impressions are
still retained in memory, with the infantile desires perpetuated in
assumed motherhood of artificial productions in baby likeness. But if
you can only see me as I feel, and have felt, in pity for the barren
love of the mothers of Rome, who are content with the pride of hope in
the advancement of their children to material possessions, and the empty
honors conferred by my uncle, the pope, you must know that with all my
imperfections I am, in the current love of purity and goodness, free
from my body’s instinctive taint. Knowing my earnest yearning for
purified worth, in my desire for the welfare of others, you will, I am
sure, lend me your aid for the higher attainments achieved in
realization by your primitive people for loving perception.”

This appeal of Idolisima received the sanction of our affections with a
warmth of genial outflow confirmed in baptismal attestation from our
eyes. The Doschessa in reciprocating the fond caresses of Idolisima said
that she and her aunt had nobly sustained the venture, showing that with
woman love’s perception, when free from selfishness, is in a measure
independent of age, when subject to the constant lead of example. In
closing it will be well to state that the union of Novuotus with
Idolisima was consummated with her father’s consent. The event was
celebrated by Penny Song, with an improvisation styled the Epoch Ardens,
Long Bow assisting with a transposition of High Water to Fair Water. But
from their lack of precedental knowledge pertaining to Manatitlan
history, and of love independent of the body’s instinctive materialism
for the bombastic usury of imagination in word portrayal, their poetical
ovations would have been deemed tame unaided by their skillful rendition
in the well timed measure of song with the instrumental accompaniment of
zithern and gourd. This transcript, of an event so varied in its
bearings, will afford you a more correct insight into the condition of
our Roman colonists, than tracings from historical records, and
statistical accounts, of which you will be advised at our earliest
leisure.

                                                                TITVIEW.

_Nota Bene._—Our wives have not been idle, but under the direction of
Oluisandria have auramented many of the Giga women of Rome, who with
silent example emulate the family of Indegatus.

                  *       *       *       *       *

At the conclusion of Titview’s letter, the Dosch stated that the initial
voyagers of the second falcon era found the colonists of Constantinople
and Jerusalem in a still more prosperous condition than those of Rome,
and equally rejoiced in the fulfillment of expectant waiting. But as
they presented the same characteristic features of dogmatic rule, with
caste variations, having their origin in the degree of control exercised
by individuals over their own habits, for the control of the masses, the
opposition to colonistic example was in the main the same. “Now, in
company of Mr. Welson, I will leave you to meditate upon the examples I
have adduced of Giga and Animalculan humanity under the rule of
instinctive habits and customs engendered from the unreason of the
stomach in its control of the brain, until your letters arrive from the
other side of the precedental gulph to strengthen the contrast between
your past and present thoughts. In the meantime you can study, with our
auramental aid, the habits of professional instinct cultivated by the
adjunct members of the corps, in adverse defiance of Heraclean example
and our thought substitutions. Although formalistically influenced to
habits of outward conformity, neither Dr. Baāhar or the curators of
sound, and artist, have changed in thought from precedental routine; and
in their present mood, would relate the events which have transpired as
surface matters of fact, for publication, or scientific gossip, and the
excitement of wonder and surprise in the gaping multitude who throng
with open ears lyceums and public lecture rooms, for drum impressions.
Your college and scientific professors can be truthfully likened to your
railroad locomotives, which swiftly progress forwards and backwards on
their rails, but once off their tracks are helpless, from their own
resources, to move themselves or their trains. But with the stage
gradations of instinct now open to your view, you can readily discover
and test the animus source of present happiness with the realities of
its impression as an assurance of immortality.”




                              CHAPTER XIX.


After matin song on the morning of the 9th of December, Correliana
announced the near approach of couriers with letters. At noon the train
arrived having in charge Padre Simon as a special envoy from Captain
Greenwood. His convoy brought letters from Europe and Montevideo in
answer to those despatched by M. Hollydorf and Mr. Welson, also to the
other members of the corps. The padre, although looking jaded with
fatigue, was in his usual happy state of mental confusion, to which the
affectionate greetings of the Heracleans and Kyronese greatly added,
causing him to exclaim: “Well, I truly declare upon the soul of my
conscience, I believe you are truly glad to see me!” His mental
perplexity was increased by the nature of his mission, which will be
gradually developed in progressive relation. Mr. Welson received a large
budget of letters, many of which were from his correspondents in Panama,
who were anxious to learn the cause of his long delayed return. Those
relating to his business engagements were quickly despatched, his
interest being more directly enlisted in the perusal of letters from his
Montevidean and Buenos Ayrean correspondents. We will first offer the
transcript of M. Baudois’s letter.

                                    BUENOS AYRES, _November 19, 182-_.

    TO SEÑOR DON GUILLERMO WELSON:

                             _Heraclea of the Falls, Andean La Plata._

_My Dear Sir_,—Your letter was duly received, and I can truly say that
its contents taxed my credulity to its utmost stretch. The discovery of
remnant Latin and Asiatic races was quite sufficient for the rational
digestion of wondering admiration! But the revelation of Animalculan
representatives of humanity quite staggered and mazed my powers of
marvelous conception, until reason had with cool reflection weighed your
written evidences of sanity. Then, quite convinced that you did not
design to test the extent of my gullibility with the conjurations of
your imagination, I found within myself evidences of sustaining approval
that confirmed my believing reliance in the sincerity of your imparted
happiness. If the extinct Giga animal species are represented by living
Animalculan, it appears quite reasonable that the order of continuation
should embrace the human. With these deductive considerations my reason
became reconciled for the recognition of your Manatitlans as real
negotiable representatives of humanity. Again my wondering admiration
expanded from your description of their habits and educated power of
self control for the exampled reciprocation of good will. It is but
natural to conceive that affectionate confidence must result from self
government, for purity and goodness are the parents of unselfishness. In
comparative degree we have seen that the children of our race, who from
necessity have been trained for the exercise of self denial, are
reliable and affectionate in contributing to the associate happiness of
others. It is impossible for me to find adequate words suited for the
expression of the relief afforded from the light that dawned upon my
perception through the vista opened for the realization of Creative
intention! Dull, indeed, must be the faculties of a person unable to
realize, upon the moment, the certain effect that would result from
cultivating the germ of goodness for the control of instinctive
animality. In deference to the Manatitlans’ loving perspicacity, which
has enabled them almost innately to discover the impression of design in
cultivating from infancy the germ of goodness, my body seemed to shrink
with shame from its distended growth of fungus, emblematical of
stupidity, under the influence of their imparted intelligence. But with
a knowledge of cause my efforts for relief were attended with an
instinctive oppression from animality, so apparent in its selfishness,
that with my utmost effort I could only obtain partial relief, with the
resolve of affording, at most, an imperfect example for the benefit of
future generations. Under the presaged reality of the Heracleans’
affectionate and enduring sympathy, my hereditary infidelity, begot from
the adverse fatuity of sectarian delusions, faded like the Pampa mists
before the brightness and genial warmth of the morning sun. Now that the
Manatitlan system of education has revived my hopes, I look forward with
trustful desire that my life may be prolonged to witness the full
inauguration of self-legislation, for time and eternity, in freedom from
the proxied impositions of instinctive priestcraft, and politic
statesmen.

With regard to the search you wished to have me make for relic
information: I have succeeded in unearthing collateral evidence which
proves beyond a doubt that many galleys from the interior waters of the
eastern continent, connecting through the Mediterranean Sea with the
Atlantic Ocean, reached the shores of the La Plata estuary before the
advent of our Christian era. At different dates during the last two
centuries rumors have been rife attesting to the existence of a walled
city inhabited by a white race, situated in an Andean valley that gives
rise to the river Vermejo, or its tributary source. The reports, at
different periods, caused the Jesuits to make several attempts to
negotiate a favorable disposition on the part of the Indians to impart
knowledge in verification; but all their overtures were treated with an
evasive skill that involved the question of its real existence in
greater mystery. Their missionary attempts to penetrate the country of
the wild hordes, beyond the river chacas, were opposed with determined
and successful hostility. The community of Pompolio has been an
acknowledged fact for centuries. The ancestors of your Kyronese were the
reputed founders of Mendoza, from which they were driven by the mongrel
progenitors of the present inhabitants.

The remains of vessels of undoubted Phœnician, Egyptian, and Roman
construction have been found imbedded in the preserving guanic and
alluvial deposits that have filled with their accumulations the inlets
where they were moored. Of these Don Pedro Garcia will give you a
succinct written account. The following notice of a relict discovery I
have copied in translation from an old number of the “Gazette de
Bogota”:—

“Voice le passage tel qui le donnent les Nouvelles Annals des Voyages,
1st Tome, page 393, anne 1832. Au village de Dolores deux lieus de
Montevideo un plantuer decouvrier une pierre tumuliare des caracteres
inconuus. Relevant cette pierre il trouve un caceau de briques
renfermant, deux sabres antique bronze, un casque, et un boucler, tres
amphoræ par le huile, et une in terre de grand dimensions. Tout ces
debris emporter au savant pere Martinez Garcia, il est parvenir a lire
la pierre ces mots in caracteres grec. Voir ton Phillipi * * * * *.
Alexand fils to Macedon * * *. Vasi epi tes execui * * * *. k * * ty
* * * en * to * * top * * Pelatin. Ca est dire completement les mots.
Alexander fils de Phillipe etait de Macedon, vers la 63 Olimpiade in ces
lieux. Petolemie les reste manque. Sur le poignee des epies est grave un
portrait que commun etre celui de Alexandre, sur le casque on remarque
un circulure representant Achille trainant le cadavre Hector ante de
murs Troie. Fait il conclure de cette decouverte de contemporaire de
Aristotle a fouile de du sol Bresil. Est il probable que Ptolemie ce
clef bein conu de la plotte de Alexandre entraine par un tempte an
milieu dece las enciens appelaient les grand mur ait ete jette les cotes
du La Plata et y ait marque son passage pax ce memorial monument fait
dans trois les ces fort curieux les archeoloques.”—_Gazette Universelle
de Bogota._

At the period this relic discovery indicates, the proximate swiftness of
the current stream setting to and from the Strait of Gibraltar to the La
Plata estuary can be estimated by present calculation, which has been
rated at twenty miles an hour during the height of a monsoon gale. This
would give a surface speed to a floating object of four or five miles an
hour, under direct impetus; and with a due allowance for counter slips
from eddies, lack of direction, and other causes, a chance voyage might
be accomplished in from twenty to thirty days. With the square sails
used in Ptolomic vessels, with shallow prows made to imitate the breasts
and necks of water fowls, a swift passage could have been made with
intention and a favoring wind; but it was the superstitious custom of
the ancient mariners to rely upon the direction of fate. M. Hollydorf or
Dr. Baāhar could arrive at a proximate conjecture of the derivative
source of the Kyronese from the Syriac root and terminals, and by like
tests, if of Beberi or Morisco extraction. The fourth wonder of your
Arabian Knights’ discoveries is the fact that a savage of the wild
hordes can be favorably influenced by exampled goodness, or in any way
hold himself amenable to either reason or kindness. Yet I would urge the
necessity of impressing them with a knowledge of good and evil, with a
detective perception sufficient for your protection against their
revengeful instincts, that you may not become the victims of misplaced
confidence for the malicious injuries inflicted by our race.

In closing my epistle I will truthfully declare that I envy the meanest
capacity of your party his privilege of contributing to your common fund
of enjoyment. How I have longed, waited, and despaired, for the
irresistible charm of affectionate sincerity, that betokens in its reach
immortality. A note from Don Pedro advised me of his family’s desire
that I would visit them as a consulting aid in your behalf. You are but
too well aware of his past source of disquietude. Greatly to my relief I
found him with his two daughters, your little favorites, Lovieta and
Lavoca, filled to overflowing with an affectionate appreciation of the
manifold resources of your discovery. As our meeting, under the
circumstances, was characteristic, I will endeavor to render the mutual
impressions of the scene in enactment. In the place of the Teutonic
custodian, with the forbidding Cyclopean visage, Don Pedro received me
at the open puerta, evidently in waiting expectation of my arrival.
Confronting each other at the entrance we stood for a second regarding
each the other with the mutual reflection of wistful eyes, until the
rising flush of our united emotions bespoke like impressions; then with
an impulsive disregard for formalistic dignity, and greatly to the
surprise of watchful neighbors, we embraced with the allied warmth of
our new role of sympathy. Shrinking from the curious gaze of strangers
we entered, Don Pedro surrendering his post to the portress who received
from me, for the first time, a courteous greeting, which was returned in
kind. In the patio we were met by Lovieta and Lavoca who, with the quick
interpretation of infantile affection, discovered the prompted source of
our unusual cordiality. Receiving permission from their father they at
once commenced to unravel the tale of Don Guillermo’s wonderful
discoveries, with frequent halting questions for elucidation, and
commentaries upon the startling information imparted from your letter to
them, which was premised with the confidential acknowledgement: “Why, M.
Baudois, it’s queer we love you so much this morning, and were so afraid
of you before, which kept us from liking you!” Then for an hour or more
they prattled of affection with such a clear perception of the
Manatitlan rendering, that I felt acutely the poverty of my own
resources. In testimony of affection’s inexhaustible attractions, I
remained with them three days before the prime object of the visit
engaged our attention, and then, with reluctance, we turned our vision
back to trace with our material guide-posts the progenitorial evidences
of Heraclean advent.

You urge me to visit Heraclea. I can assure you that there is not in the
wide range of thought a prospect that would afford me a tithe of the
pleasure; but I am ashamed to acknowledge that I feel within me the old
leaven of instinctive dislike for the members of the corps, from
nationality. For personally, as you are aware, I have no acquaintance
with them. From this cause I am so doubtful of self control within that
I cannot with sincerity venture the experiment of voluntary association
with them, even under Heraclean auspices. My feelings, as a Frenchman,
are still instinctively patriotic, notwithstanding the reproof
administered in every sentence of your letter. I am well aware of all
you would urge in favor of the trial, and my reason sanctions with
desire all you could say; and it is with humiliation that I am candidly
obliged to avow myself unfit for an association with the German members
of the corps, although they have received the prestige of Heraclean
adoption. If my disposition would allow me to enact the part of
affectionate sympathy, the treacherous disguise of hypocrisy would not
shield me from Manatitlan auramentation, with whom I would fain hold
myself, in sincerity, worthy, to the extent of my freedom from
instinctive disability. However much you may regret my lack of the noble
qualities, which allow your unbiased passions the privilege of repose, I
am certain that your native Gallic infusion of clannish prejudice, will,
even with your new light, appreciate the honesty of my motives. To merit
the esteem of the Manatitlans, I will use every possible means for the
subjugation of my sectional prejudices; having already been obliged to
acknowledge to myself, from the revolting impression still retained of
the commune massacres of Paris, that with the murderous spirit in train,
we should scarcely have shown as merciful a record as the Germans, if we
had been victorious. With better generals as players, in the deadly game
of war, the weak movements of our imbeciles were forestalled and
checkmated. This causes a furious undercurrent for reprisal, especially
as the war was precipitated by a tyrant without the provisionary tact to
foresee and provide for the tottering destiny of his throne. Of course,
the disastrous results of war reflect from the ruler to the subjects,
alike in imbecility and determined intelligence. Our soldiers were
driven like sheep to the slaughter. In fact, there was no real cause for
the war on either side, and great reason why it should have been firmly
opposed on the part of the French people, who have in the game enacted
the part of pawns and are paying the penalty. The victorious can afford
the dole of generosity to the defeated. This retrospective glance I
offer as a specimen of my instinctive forbearance, and until I feel the
sincerity of my self-control, I must avoid temptation likely to arouse
hatred and revenge, the chief constituents of patriotism. With sincere
gratitude for the happiness I have enjoyed from your intuition, you can
rest assured of its strong impression in reciprocation.

                                                             H. BAUDOIS.

N. B. Since the above conclusion of my letter, I have visited and opened
a tumulus raised over the remains of a Roman woman. The inscription
engraved upon a stone covered by the mound, had been rendered nearly
illegible from detrition, but we were enabled to decipher, with an
approach to certainty, the following detached words: COR. * * * *, * * *
AUGUSTA * *. IB UXOR ⛳ * * * * * * *. ALLISSUIS. * * *. The distaff was
an emblem used for the commemoration of industrious habits when graved
in an upright position, but when trailed from a spun thread, it
indicated a gad-about reputation. Don Pedro will write you a particular
description of our joint labors. I will now stay my still overburdened
pen, to give my thoughts maturity for better expression. H. B.

                  *       *       *       *       *

As Mr. Welson read M. Baudois’s letter aloud with a slow, clear, and
distinct accentuation, it was intelligible to all, and elicited warm
encomiums, with a strong desire to listen to the reading of Don Pedro
Garcia’s, which we transcribe.

                                                           BUENOS AYRES.

QUERIDO DON GUILLERMO,—Since we received your letters describing your
marvelous adventures (which we believed, because we could not doubt the
truthful sincerity of your affection), we have been in a constant
flutter of joyous exhilaration, which has served to clear the murky
atmosphere of our household from its time-honored odors and rites of
instinctive religion. While bestirring ourselves for the relief of our
bodies with the labors of purification for domestic entertainment, we
(M. Baudois is now a member of our family) have employed our thoughts in
trying to anticipate the effect of your revelation in stemming the tide
of ritual selfishness. Also in measuring the extent of opposition and
consternation it will cause among the ceremonial adherents of sects
congregating for the worship of self-preservation while preying upon
each other. We have already felt a foreboding of its practical effect,
in demonstration, from our family incubus, Padre Molinero. By depriving
sects of their material heaven and hell,—upon which in positive and
negative entrance fee priestcraft has issued policies of insurance for
the soul of instinct from time out of date,—you will lay an eternal
embargo upon their selfish schemes of praying premiums. Indeed, in
sanguine forecast we can now see the gasping flutterings of saving grace
in its last ritualistic struggles for salvation from inevitable
oblivion, giving place to the glorious effulgence of an affectionate
immortality. As you can well imagine, I have but little to say in
extenuation for my past infatuation, other than that my reason and
reverence halted with the dullness of indifference, causing me to accept
forms, from the fact that my veneration could find no hopeful resting
place. We can now scarcely endure the reflection, that through life we
have remained so dull of apprehension, as not to have discovered from
self-intuition, that purity and goodness could alone fulfill the
indications of Creative intention for the assurance, in life, of an
affectionate immortality. From the moment I read your letter I became
subject to an awakening translation from self, and in relief from the
dread incubus, become overjoyed with the prospect of affording aid to
others. That you may more fully realize the effect of the transition, it
was quickly discovered by the watchful expectancy of your chiquita
favorites Lovieta and Lavoca, who were waiting for the confections of
love they knew you would not fail to send for their affectionate
regalement. When the rays of gladness began to dawn in my face, they
interrupted my reading by nestling their arms about my neck, while they
whispered, as if fearful of disturbing the joyful emotions, “O father,
how happy you look, there must be something good for us,—do let us kiss
you and then read it for we long to hear what Querido Don Guillermo has
written to make you look so alegre.” With this appeal, seconded by an
affectionate assault, I commenced from the beginning of your letter,—but
half unfolded to my own view,—and as I read explained to their wondering
comprehension the marvelous transitions of your experience. With the
introduction of Correliana my reading became interjectional from the
staccato inflection of kisses telegraphed to her goodness, with the
exclamations, “How beautiful,” “Marvilloso!” “Oh, if”—but the wish
remained unfinished in voiceful expression, yet the conscious flush of
momentary sadness plainly interpreted the burden of their thoughts in
hopeful appeal. These emotions, advocated in truthful sincerity the sway
of goodness, during the infantile period, if unprejudiced by deleterious
example,—when my unfortunates have retained its impression so perfectly,
notwithstanding their exposure to its adverse influence. With the ready
perception of such youthful neophytes the Manatitlans’ demonstration of
exampled direction in purity and goodness must succeed with our race.
For older appreciation, how could its truthful impression be more
clearly defined for the comprehension of common sense, or more agreeable
to loving veneration directed to the Supreme Source of all good, than
through the attractive avenue of infantile perception? Practical, or
exampled purity and goodness in attainment, are in substance, to my
understanding, the length and breadth of Manatitlan “theology,” if I may
be permitted to use a word so devoid of intrinsic meaning, for the
expression of the highest possible conceptions of realized achievement.
I feel certain that I have not misconstrued the Manatitlan “Code” from
the enthusiastic approval of the above named theologists known to your
loving sympathy.

How the sectaries will dispose of the Manatitlan method of perfecting
their children in loving affection cannot be solved by anticipation. But
my household has been “blessed” with a partial solution of the Catholic
method that will be adopted, by a demonstrative denunciation of you and
your Manatitlan exemplars as infernal innovators, by your old “friend”
Padre Molinero. Forgetting in his wrathful displeasure that anathemas
were vicarious oaths in fiendish transposition for priestly cursing, he
dispensed them freely for the final disposal of all innovators, and in
personal designation included those that I hold most dear in my
affectionate esteem. With a self-control, that made me feel for a moment
exultant, in view of my former frailties of temper, I coolly reminded
him of the formulistic rites established by society for association;
assuring him that I should sustain the sanctuary privileges, and stable
rights of my roof, recognized by civilized humanity, against the
intrusion of any and all persons refusing to hold themselves amenable to
the unobtrusive rules of instinctive propriety. This admonition so
enraged him, that his malignant intolerance burst forth in demoniacal
ebullition, heedless of my direct hints that he was overstepping the
limits of patient endurance. But as he continued to inveigh, I with
authority withheld his further speech, with a determination that
overawed him, and then, while directing his way to the outer gates,
stated in plain terms my desire to hear him express a determination to
absent himself from my house henceforth and forever. This final
ultimatum, after years of undisputed sway, caused his former expression
of vengeful hate to appear, in comparison, like the mild gleams of
summer electricity, in contrast with the fierce flashes uttered with the
deep mutterings of the full charged thunder cloud. Indeed, when the
portera discharged him with her absolution, his visage became visibly
expanded with a toadish expression of ire, and his throat with a sack
constriction resembling the cobra’s when about to strike for venomed
injection. Failing in speech to intimidate, he had recourse to the
fierce ritually crossings of excommunication, which formerly caused
kings and emperors to tremble with instinctive fear. This impotent
effort must have summoned to my face a contemptuous expression, for
Teudschen, the portera, made a significant gesture of questioning
inquiry with her foot, as he passed over the threshold, which I
negatived with a decisive shake of the head, else, I should now have to
bear the stigma of sanctioning an act of celerity she was desirous of
communicating to Padre Molinero to expedite his exit. Instead of denying
her impulsive intention of rendering pedal acceleration to the padre’s
outward movement, when I reproved her for the meditated unfeminine act,
which in consummation would have given rise to great scandal, she
innocently asked, “what else could a woman do when there was no broom
handy?” Then she continued, in extenuation, “If men come into the houses
of good peoples, dressed like women in petticoats, and don’t behave
properly, as they ought, it’s right that they should be served by a
woman as a man would treat them if he dared!” This Hibernic style of
pleading, with its touch upon the mild nature and lack of decision in my
exercise of authority, at once dispelled my ill humor; and I questioned
her, whether as a good Lutheran she was familiar with the text that
taught the returns that were to be made for despiteful treatment? After
a little thoughtful hesitation, she said, “I don’t exactly remember, but
I believe they were kicked out of the house.” This answer closed my
catechismal interview, but however remote its orthodoxy was from the
inculcation of the text, its validity was loyal in the sound doctrinal
expression of instinct. For the humorous method of Teudschen’s style of
speaking, with the broken wabbling tones of her voice, in variation from
Low Dutch guttural to the harsh grating rasp of High German, I will
refer you to your memory of the gratification you derived from
conversing with her. Leaving the patio with my feelings of anger
unruffled by Teudschen’s patriotic simplicity, which had long been
aggravated by Padre Molinero’s French sympathies, I returned falteringly
to the salon, fearing that the mother of my children might view the
expulsion of her confessor as an unpardonable sin; still I could not
help congratulating myself upon the manner in which I had rid my
household of the traitorous fomenter of misrule and family discord.
Entering her apartment fully prepared to meet her scornful and defiant
glances, ill masked under the disguise of indifference, I was startled
out of my assumed composure by the unexpected greeting of tearful eyes,
and soft pleading glances bespeaking self-deprecation. These
premonitions of repentant affection brought back, with the loving glow
of gladness, the happy impressions of our early wedded life when I was
all sufficient as a confessor without the aid of priest or mother-in-
law. Determined to make good the step I had taken for freeing my family
from the prying curiosity and dictation of droning priests, I met her
advances with affectionate warmth; but after listening to her
expressions of revived sympathy, I with conscious power, never before
realized, asked her if she was willing to seek another priestly adviser;
if she still considered it necessary to bar her husband from his
affectionate privilege? Feeling a sympathetic tremor in full assent with
my wishes, as she silently embraced me, I expressed, with endearments,
the hope that I had proved myself worthy of her love and confidence,
except from occasional displays of temper provoked by the influence that
had caused her estrangement. An answering sob, with its regretful
pressure, confirming the favorable advantage of the moment, I questioned
whether her unbiased perception had ever discovered in me a willful
deficiency, or one of indifference, that I could correct for enhancing
her present happiness, or advancing her preparation for a future state.
If I had been so unfortunate or neglectful in my intention, with her
affectionate reciprocation, I would make it my constant text for
amendment. In vain she tried to give expression in words to the welling
revival of loving emotions, but, although in voiceful effort she failed,
her lips with truthful impression absolved me. Blinded with repentant
tears she indicated her desire to be left alone; obedient to the
unexpressed wish I left her.

Lovieta and Lavoca, who had witnessed the scene of happy reconciliation,
sat with arms entwined about each other’s necks, mingling their tears in
grateful sympathy, otherwise holding themselves aloof with wonderful
discretion, as if with the understanding that their participation would
divert the full measure of love’s revived reciprocation. But as the door
closed upon their mother, I felt their hands caressingly raise mine to
their lips, while in relieved vent of consolation and childish
dislike, they exclaimed in sobbing accents, first Lovieta,
“The—the—ugly—o—old zopilote!” [carrion vulture] to which Lavoca
appended, “Who—who—comes—to—to—our—house,—when—he—he—knows—we—we—ain’t
dead.”

Upon you, my dear Don Guillermo, rests this irreverent title, and
knowledge of vocation in application, and as you see the retentive
rendering my children have made of it, I hope that you will not sin away
the day of grace offered for repentance! If you, a stranger, found
yourself unable to resist the pleadings of their affectionate natures,
you can judge of a fond father’s partiality, and will excuse his
frequent introduction of their quaint comparisons, especially as they
are largely indebted to you for their capital ideas? They have proved
the choicest of our blessings, and in love’s arbitrations have ever been
the pure mediums of affectionate reunion. After a sufficient season had
been allowed from my anxious desire, the children were sent to add their
weight to the favoring balance of their mother’s affection. Quickly
returning, with guarded steps prompted for affectionate surprise, they
approached silently,—as I sat with bowed head, hopefully musing, with
the desire that Consolata might be changed into unwavering semblance of
your Heraclean matrons,—and the velvety wreath of their arms again
encircled my neck, while Lovieta and Lavoca’s Manatitlan voices
whispered, in joyous emulation, “Go to mamma!” Dear Don Guillermo, you
will rejoice to know that she met me at the door with a fond embrace,
and the sobbing supplication, “Pedro, can you forgive me? If you can,
and will let me love you again, your desires shall ever be mine!” The
coveted appeal required no repetition, for there was in her words an
expression of anguished regret, that surprised conviction with the
assurance of our mutual amendment. You will, I am sure, forgive me for
obtruding my uxorious prolixity, in giving vent to the expression of our
united happiness, a boon long coveted without the hopeful expectation of
realization. Consolata (I trust that I shall never again have occasion
to revive the old name of Malaspina, as a household term of endearment
addressed to my wife, once so painfully familiar to your ears), rejoices
that your forced adventure has terminated so happily, for she insists
that her willful vagaries caused you to accept Captain Greenwood’s
invitation. In delegating our representative pen to ask your forgiveness
for the discomfort she caused, she promises an amendment that shall be
addressed in requital to the comfort of others. Should you return, you
will be surprised with the change wrought in the appearance of our
household, even with the advantage this will afford you for
anticipation. Could you but note the placid enjoyment of Lovieta and
Lavoca, imparted from the blending and calm repose of parental example,
your present joys would be greatly enhanced. Even Teudschen, in the
wondering admiration of her phlegmatic stolidity, clasps her hands with
surprised inertia, while subject to the active direction of Consolata in
the busy avocations that ever delight the tidy housekeeper. In truth,
there is a strange mystery, which puzzles us in accounting for her
inventive resources, and their apt adaptability for the conservation of
purity and comfort. In the style of her own and childrens’ dresses,
which in apparent devisement originated within herself, we discover
prompted aid, as well as in the selection and preparation of material.
But for comfort, cleanliness, and beauty of adaptation, they are a
constant source of congratulatory admiration, although _outrê_ in regard
to the prevailing fashions; but as they bear a strong resemblance to the
Heraclean costumes, description would prove gratuitous. If this great
change in Consolata has been wrought through the reproving self
conviction of the unlovely contrast she presented to the description you
gave of Correliana Adinope, I can almost feel grateful that her ill
temper, under the sway of her confessor, was carried to the extremity of
forcing upon itself a remedy that has proved so salutary in effect; and
the fear of a relapse, which was at first entertained, is gradually
passing away. M. Baudois, without hesitation, suggests Manatitlan
influence. If it is possible that they have vouchsafed us direction, as
guides and instructors in our extremity, they are certainly aware of our
grateful emotions. Impressed with this belief, without fully
understanding the process by which auramental thought-substitution is
effected, Lovieta and Lavoca, when subject to transient scintillations
of temper, will firmly close their mouths to guard against the utterance
of words prompted by anger. The change in M. Baudois presents many
features equally remarkable with those of Consolata. You will recollect
that he excelled as a pianist, but of that class whose talent resides in
the mechanical use of the fingers and eyes in execution; now he holds
you enrapt with the pathos of harmonized sympathy. He often exclaims
that his seemingly impromptu compositions are a marvel to himself. Has
it not amazed you greatly, from the ready realization of immortal
impressions through the avenue of unselfish goodness, that humanity has
continued heedless through the lapse of so many ages, blinded with will
o’wisp infatuations? Although still full to overflowing with grateful
reciprocations of happy experience, we will forego their written
expression for the present, to give place for the description of our
discoveries of relict mementoes brought by the ocean currents and wind
wafts from the Eastern continent, decades of centuries ago. They will
certainly afford Mr. Dow material aid upon which to found his
conjectural history.

While dredging the Laguna Fecal in the year 1852, for ammoniacal guano
in its crystalized and mixed combinations, the sieve grapnel brought to
the surface several pieces of fashioned wood of remarkable appearance.
From their shape and peculiar method of union, the curiosity of the
laborers became excited; and as my devotion to antiquarian research was
known to the Padrone, a message was sent to me expressing the desire
that I would attend personally and direct the labors of the workmen in
accordance with my judgment. Before my arrival, an anchor of hard copper
alloy was raised. After carefully removing the ammoniacal incrustations,
a clear impress of its form was found stamped on the shank beneath the
ring. This indenture was the maritime seal of the early Phœnician
cities. Knowing the high scientific value that I placed upon the relict
vestiges of past ages, the Padrone and workmen voluntarily surrendered
all that had been recovered.

After carefully sounding to obtain a knowledge of the imbedded extent of
the detached portions, and to learn the dimensions of the vessel, if its
planks and timbers were yet retained in position by their fastenings, it
was inclosed in a coffer-dam, and the retained guanic admixture with
water was pumped out for evaporation. When cleared, the trove, with the
aid of dredge and shovels, was in a few days fully exposed to view. As
we had anticipated, the prize proved to be the remains of an ancient
galley. Calculating from the keel, which remained nearly entire, the
extreme length from its heel to the stem of the prow must have exceeded,
free from overworks, seventy feet. The keel was stepped for prow, main,
and stern masts. The former and latter were respectively placed within a
few feet of the extreme ends of the keelson, or its semblance, which
strengthened the true step in the keel. The septum support of the main-
mast united the after and forward decks, separating the banks of
oarsmen, with ample space between for passage fore and aft. Beneath the
lower bank-pits a portion of the deck remained, showing the foot-wear of
the rowers in their forward and backward steps of reach. The hold
beneath was of sufficient capacity for the storage of provisions for a
long voyage. The run-planking on the starboard side was sufficiently
well preserved to show the columbares for a single bank of eight oars,
as well as those in the stern designed for the rudder blades. The fact
of there being only a single bank of oars in the true planking, afforded
presumptive evidence of commercial intention, as in a vessel so large
their propelling power would have proved insufficient for ordinary
progression, but as adjuvantic aids to the sails, in light winds, they
would prove valuable. The seams between the planks still retained the
papyrus with which they had been caulked; this had been introduced with
pitch or melted resin; the combined effects of age and ammonia had
changed the paying substance, so that in appearance it resembled amber.
The remains of the galley presented for the study of the antiquarian a
double interest, historical and mechanical, the latter, with its
material indications of skill in art adaptation, affording a clue to the
periodic stages of progression as the head and hand mark of coeval
intelligence. The wood used in its construction was the red, aromatic
cedar of Lebanon, which gave indications of large growth, many of the
planks reaching the entire length of the hull, perhaps determining at
the time the size of the vessel. During the early ascendancy of Roman
rule, the Appenine pine, or fir, was brought into requisition for ship
building; but the cedar of Lebanon still retained its reputation founded
upon intrinsic value, as it exceeded all other woods in elastic
toughness, lightness, durability, and unattractive freedom from
parasitic accumulations peculiar to the Mediterranean and ocean. The
rostrum or beak had been detached from the prow and set upon an altar
aft, among other memorial lares. In form it blended the graceful curve
of the swan’s neck with the repulsive rugæ of the serpent’s expansive
skin, characteristically sustained with the mythical “figure-head” of a
dragon. In addition to the holes mortised in the true keel for the
reception of the ribs, they were secured in place and rendered steadfast
by a clamp attachment to an overlaying substitute for the modern
keelson, to which they were firmly bolted, with a workmanlike precision
that had defied the lapse of time, and decomposing agency of salts and
exposure, a chance portion only of the metal being exposed. But to the
lost art of hardening copper with a non-erosive alloy, its preservation
was chiefly to be attributed. The larboard portion of the prow’s
planking still retained the eye, consecrated as the watchful guardian of
course and detector of danger.

When the hull was raised from its long repose in the bed of the lagoon,
which had formerly been an inlet of the La Plata, and thoroughly dried,
it was restored, in a measure, to its former lightness, from which it
was easy to conceive its swift progress over the waters when impelled by
oars or a favoring gale, as it but slightly taxed the strength of twenty
men to bear it upon their shoulders to its present resting place, in the
outer patio of my museum built for its reception.

Your description of the Kyronese lineaments favors a descent from the
primal union of the Phœnician with the North African races. I have
relics exhumed remote from the shores of the La Plata, of undoubted
Morisco fabrication, some of which bear a date corresponding with the
second century of our era. From these material evidences, we have
conclusive proof that the currents evoked from the disgorgements of the
Mediterranean’s tidal surplus, through the Strait of Gibraltar, and the
large river-drains of South America, by the La Plata estuary, in monsoon
reciprocation, have proved the accidental highway of tempest-sped
vessels, from the period when they were first built with a carrying
capacity sufficient for the transportation of merchandise, and the free
navigation of the inland seas with sails. The diversity of color, facial
contour, and structural art of fabrication, plainly bespeak an
intermixture of European, Asiatic, and African races with the aborigines
of America. That the supply was accidental, and limited to the
recurrence of causes happening after the lapse of long intervals, is
apparent from the numerous depopulated cities, whose inhabitants, like
those of old Heraclea, presumed upon their ritual intelligence to
enslave the natives and barbarously treat them, until the arrogance of
folly and over-indulgence opened a way for retributive judgment in total
annihilation. Hence the mottled appearance of the natives in the
neighborhood of the ruined cities of Mexico and Yucatan, derived from a
relapse after a sparse inoculation of the lighter shades of color. The
same effects are apparent in all the coast eddies confluent with the
inter-oceanic currents from the disemboguement of large rivers, as in
the fruitful valleys of their interior tributaries, ruins indicating
exotic races are generally found.

As all these conjectural evolutions of deductive thought, relative to
the transition events of the past, are unprofitable, in comparison with
the cultivation of the conscious elements of goodness, for the
prospective happiness of future generations, through the avenue of
educated self-legislation, you must excuse the little attention that I
have devoted to research for the elucidation of Heraclean derivation.

Our desire to see you, under the impressions imparted from Heraclean
example, has increased with our happiness, until it has become almost
irresistible. Strange as it may appear to you, Consolata consulted me
this morning upon the feasibility of making a trip to Heraclea. The idea
was an infinite source of pleasure to us all, M. Baudois alone
expressing regretful sorrow that there was a prejudiced obstacle in the
way over which he held doubtful control, and until he had reduced it to
kindly subjugation he would not adventure himself as the possible cause
of a lack of freedom to the genial flow of sincerity. The nature of this
“lion,” still at large, barring his way to Heraclean enjoyment, we can
surmise, but we think from the present cordial relations existing
between him and Teudschen that it would prove a whimsical prejudice
rather than a reality. Lovieta and Lavoca have set their little heads
together in council, with our consent and approval, to solicit your aid
and intercession for their admission into the Heraclean school.
Notwithstanding our children are to us the solacing light and warmth of
affection in personification, we wish to advance their happiness, for
transmission, upon a sure basis, even if we shall be obliged to defer
our own visit for a season; for we have full faith in their increasing
love, and shall find ample consolation for our temporary bereavement in
the prospect of a joyful reunion. In the meantime,—if our petition
should prove agreeable to the prætor and tribunes,—while waiting for
Captain Greenwood, the children specially desire that you will extend to
the Manatitlan volantaphs an invitation for them to make our house their
abiding place whenever they visit Buenos Ayres. M. Baudois is now
engaged in devising means for their accommodation on our roof, having
already completed the architectural designs for the falcon mews, and
colemena for the phaeton bees. As yet his invention halts in calculating
the furnishing requirements suited in capacity for the size of our
anticipated guests. Lovieta and Lavoca jointly solicit one or more of
the Manatitlan donecellita giantescoes to act as auramental governantes
in preparation for their entrance into the Heraclean school, if the
Dosch approves and will favor them with a suspension of their school
regulations. “If the request is granted, they promise to attend
personally to their comfort, and will try to prove obedient to their
direction in everything.” Consolata hopes that your present powers of
self-control will enable you to banish from your memory the remembrance
of her unworthiness, promising, with the opportunity, to give full
expression to the sincerity of her supplication with practical evidences
of her amendment. Our endeavors to impress “our little folks” with the
relative size of the Manatitlan giantescoes, mediums, and tits, has been
but partially successful, from our own deficiency of subject
comprehension. At present they seize upon representative minutiæ, in
suggestive similitude, for mental comparison. For the material
illustration of head capacity, pins of different sizes have been brought
into requisition, and for the eyes those of needles; still there is a
lingering vagueness in all of our conceptions of Manatitlan proportions
in bodily endowment.

If consistent with Manatitlan propriety, in the economy of time, it
would afford us great satisfaction if they would permit us to entertain
a sufficient number of their people to keep us well directed, for we
have become vividly conscious of our instinctive frailties. In
anticipation of a favorable answer to our joint requests I have had a
flag-staff raised upon our roof surmounted with the letters P. G. In
closing we wish to inquire if, as with us, in our household association,
you, in your intercourse with the Heracleans are disinclined to speak
unless you have something useful, solacing, or mirthful to say? We have
certainly grown chary in speech, but with a flowing increase in the
current of loving communication, with the prospect of reducing language
to a nearer approximation to the truthful intention of its manifest
devisement. With gratitude for the inexpressible happiness you have been
the means of conferring, we shall ever esteem it a favor if you will
permit us to supply your material wants, foreign to the resources of
Heraclea.

                                                  PEDRO GARCIA,
                                              _for household adherents_.

P. S. Will it surprise you to learn that Pedro Garcia, whose vanity
delighted in being esteemed learned in past usages under the patronizing
titles conferred by the garnered wisdom of colleges and societies, and
M. Baudois, the corresponding savan of the French Academy, have
consigned to the elementary combustion of fire all their theoretical
works? On the 27th prox. the uniformly bound works of my library,
expatiating upon the theory and practice of theology, medicine, and law,
in company with those of M. Baudois treating on glacial and other
theories of the earth’s transitions and destiny, were carted to my
quinta and consigned to the flames. P. G.




                              CHAPTER XX.


After the letters of M. Baudois and Don Pedro had been read aloud to the
Prætor’s family, the Dosch remarked that the Animalculan Mouthpats
furnished confirmatory evidence of the provincialism of the Asiatic
Heraclean emigrants, as they were undoubtedly parasitic companions of
the involuntary voyage across the ocean. Their Scythio-Celtic jargonic
idiom corresponds with the Latins’ incursive invasions into the Klappish
and Celtic territories, while in habits and customs they show the marked
impression of instinctive traits peculiar to the old Heracleans in their
irruptive stages of progression. With the classical tendency of history
to transmit evil, the Mouthpats have retained the traditional
impressions of their ancestors’ instinctive association with the Gigas,
in addition to those derived from direct inheritance in kind.

In compliance with Don Pedro’s request for Manatitlan aid and
protection, the Dosch announced his intention of sending two giantescoes
to act as auramental governantes for Lovieta and Lavoca, preparatory to
their entrance into the Heraclean school, which were to be selected from
the reserve maiden fund for the relief of widowers. In answer to Mr.
Welson’s inquiry with regard to their age, the Dosch assured him that
there was no need of anxiety on that score, for the funded maidens were
not of the soured acrimonious kind represented as “old maids” by Giga
bruits, whose passionate instincts of affection had been denied
marriageable reciprocation, but of matured kindly dispositions to whom
the controlling influence of animal passion was unknown. “Yet,” he
continued, “they possess the common inheritance of womankind, which
delights in making the tongue vocalize thoughtful inspirations of
affection; but with our Manatitlan matrons and maidens its use for
detraction is also unknown.”

Correliana’s usually quiet composure had shown evidences of happy
transition to fluttering excitement, after an interview with the padre,
which was heightened when the Dosch, after the preliminaries for
Manatitlan correspondence with the family of Don Pedro had been
arranged, asked her to show the material cause of her gratefully glad
perturbation. Upon this hint she produced from her bosom the
photographic likeness of Captain Greenwood. This he had presented to her
on board of the _Tortuga_; but while engaged in packing, the day before
their departure for Heraclea, it had mysteriously disappeared, and after
thorough search it was supposed to be irretrievably lost. The wind was
charged with its abstraction, and the waters of the river as its
receiver, but Correliana was confident in the belief of their innocence
from the absence of the first party, as the day was perfectly calm, and
she recollected of placing it beneath a book when the Captain required
the aid of her hands. The book, unfortunately, was the “Art of
Confession Made Easy,” by Fray Manuel de Jaen; and belonged to Padre
Simon, who in one of his “fits” of abstraction recovered it, and used
the photograph as a mark, unobserved by Correliana; and as it contained
his polemical stock of knowledge for quotation, he was guarded in
withholding it from others, and immediately placed it in the transom
locker of his stateroom, where it remained lost to his own memory until
found by Antonio on the boat’s passage down the river. As the loss of
the photograph had been the cause of continued anxiety to all, from the
inconsolable regrets of the loser, the Captain determined to summons the
padre to appear with the couriers at Amelcoy, to bear the treasure back
to its owner, in penance for the sorrow he had caused by his
heedlessness. Correliana’s conscious blush of happiness, as the
semblance of her chosen was passed in review, imparted its impression to
the invisible as well as the visible, for the Doschavita with her
coterie of companions were anxious to judge of the selection made by
their favorite.

The Dosch remarked that the odd fancy of the premeditated surroundings,
was in kind characteristic of the jumble of gold, charity, and redeeming
grace, as the barter conditions of salvation in the Giga mythology.
Professional craftsmen, and mechanical members of societies and orders,
parade their badges and insignia as the vain-glorious emblems of
exclusive selfishness, while they preach a universal heaven free to all
without distinction of persons. Your democratic orators, styled the
“heaven born,” assume attitudes for portraiture suited to their special
assumptions of vanity for self-inflation; but with the evident fear that
the beholder’s perception will fail to engross the reflection of their
eloquent ability, they hold in their hands appropriately labeled books
or manuscripts. The doctor’s idiosyncratic pose is defiant, as if he
recognized death in a successful rival. With his nose scornfully
upturned he consults vacancy with his eyes, in search of prognostic
symptoms for diagnostic antagonism; his left hand advanced, is raised
aloft inclosing a vial wand labeled Nostratic Viaticum, while his right
with feeling expression triumphantly grasps the skull of a patient who
had tested the value of his prescriptive vise. The lawyer, brigand, and
priest, assume attitudes as characteristically expressive of
professional vanity. The vanity of the fashionable “lady,” with the
mythological signification of intention, adverse to her impressions,
rests with her hand, in studied negligence, placed upon a volume of
popular sermons, allowing the gilt label, “Christian Virtues,” to appear
with an array of ringed jewels upon her fingers.

Captain Greenwood in keeping with the advertising disposition of selfish
vanity, in emblematic signification of vocation, but with a humorous
variation, has perched himself upon a pile of bagged paddy (the Siamese
apply the term paddy to everything unclean), while a companion with the
evident design of expressing the gambling tendency of speculation, is
engaged in dealing “hands” from a pack of cards. In the background of
the photograph the religious view exposes a pagoda and mill for cleaning
paddy. The face of the captain expresses an impression of saturnine and
cynical appreciation of the rare combinations entering into the tout
ensemble of the picture. His dress, of Siamese fashion, is also in
alliance with the counterparts of the scene, and his cognomic
designation of Truly Rural Greenwood. The portrait reveals, with all its
incongruous constituents, the “sterling” qualities concealed beneath the
acrid asperities of the outer husk. These were discovered by our waiftly
Heraclean cousin; and her amused study of his germ, divested of the
rough externals imposed by customary habits, attracted his attention to
the cause, which led him to intrust the Kyronese to the care and
direction of Mr. Dow, and the vessel to his subordinates, while he
devoted himself to the removal of his civilized artificials, for the
weft of his thoughts with the proffer of her own. His quick appreciation
of her artless worth and purity directed his thoughts to self
investigation, with a perceptible improvement in all that pertained to
the ruling power of her influence. Notwithstanding the growing strength
of the attraction was open for the observance of all, not a word of
surprise was uttered, or a quizzical manifestation of instinct to
insinuate motives other than those of the purest nature expressed in an
alliance of the sexes. Even the “hands” and sailors’ tongues found no
prompting encouragement for gossip, each rendering homage to her power
with imposed reverence suited to their capabilities of perception, while
in evidence of the controlling influence of her example, there was a
marked change in their habits in all the essentials of purity.

Correliana submitted to the retrospective review of the Dosch, as a
matter of fact relation, in freedom from other emotions than those of
joyful gladness for the recovery of her treasure, and the appreciation
bestowed by the Manatitlan matrons upon the wisdom of her choice. Then
Mr. Dow smilingly offered the Dosch and Doschessa the privilege of
reading the letter of his wife and children; but as it was one of
reproof we will simply state, that in writing home he had been so much
absorbed in the prospective grandeur of his elevation as the precentor
of the discovery, that the remarkable traits of the Heracleans and
Manatitlans had scarcely been noticed, but in a sufficient degree for
the excitement of intense curiosity. This unpardonable oversight had
caused, in the place of congratulations, a letter filled to overflowing
with catechistic questions relating to the habits and customs of the
Animalculans, to the entire exclusion of a remark touching his agency in
the discovery, inasmuch as it would contribute to his personal fame. The
reflex action of Mr. Dow’s omission greatly amused the Dosch and his
wife. After the mirth had subsided, occasioned by the reading of Mr.
Dow’s family letter, which left him as void of home information as he
had left them in his letter communication with regard to the habits and
customs of the Manatitlans, M. Hollydorf proposed to read aloud the
reply of the R. H. B. Society to his letter.




                              CHAPTER XXI.


                                           BERLIN, _September 3d, 187-._

TO M. HOLLYDORF, _Director of the Animalculan Corps of the R. H. B.
Society, at present conducting their explorations in the newly
discovered city of Heraclea Doweri, in the country of the wild hordes in
the Andean region of La Plata._—Greeting, in behalf of our patrons and
members of the Society, with personal congratulations! Wonder and
surprised amazement are terms of too weak invention to express the
emotional excitement caused by your letter of discovery, which reached
us with unaccountable despatch. The introduction,—although conducted
with consummate skill, that our credulity might not be overstrained by
the relation of concurring events in a manner too abrupt,—was of a
character so startling that our mouths unconsciously retained the smoke
of our pipes, to be emitted in the full volume of accumulation with an
involumed sigh of relief, when impressed with the conviction of your
sanity. It appears from your relation, that your progress was attended
by concurrent events of the most surprising description, which by a
conjunction of circumstances, when subject to opposition, were readily
overcome, with an effect that tended to the final development of the
Animalculan race of humanity. The train with the slightest descriptive
discrepancy would have consigned your letter to the basket as a maniacal
production. As it was, with the first announcement, all eyes became
fixed upon the reader in mute astonishment, too deeply impressed for
skeptical thought, or incredulous comparison; the valves of respiratory
emotion continued closed to voluntary exercise, with singular endurance,
until the last sentence of your letter opened their vent with a
prolonged whe-w accompanied with a volume of condensed smoke
commensurate with the capacity of each member for marvelous inflation.
Before proceeding to the theoretical discussion, and precedental
comparison of your revelations with those of past ages, the members
indulged in a variety of extra-scientific ejaculations decidedly foreign
to your Manatitlan code of educational ethics.

In discursive consultation after the members had become sufficiently
restored for the exercise of their wonted mental equilibrium, by
potations obnoxious to the cultivated habits of your exemplars, the
discovery was subjected to an analytico-cosmogenerical evolution of
ideas. During the discussion a variety of theories were advanced by the
prominent members, embracing involution and evolution, to account for
the infinitesimal size of the Animalculan race of humanity, and causes
of reduction. Some advocated psychological condensation of the souls of
our race after death, the degrees of perfection being indicated by the
gradations of size distinguishing the castes of giantesco, medium, and
tit. Others that they were the concentrated essences of our human
vitality in happy translation exonerated from the corruptions of organic
support. But a majority were inclined to subject you and your associates
to a thorough test upon the score of optical illusion; a few, however,
contended that you were subject to necromantic agency. In fact, your
mental and physical condition was analyzed with the nicest tests of
scrutiny that could be brought to bear from the manifestations developed
in the composition of your letter. From the extremes of experience, and
extensive resources of the members for tracing the influences of
climate, with the moral effect of the eventful transitions through which
you passed, they soon arrived at the definite conclusion that your
discoveries were legitimately compatible with a sound mind,
notwithstanding the precedental lack of parallel examples for
comparison. But before final adoption, the effects likely to be wrought
in mental, moral, and theological philosophy were elaborately discussed.
But from a lack of data to establish the fact of their complete and
separate existence as a race, or whether they are representative soul
iotas of our own race undergoing the process of refinement, the question
was held in suspension for the bias of well attested information. The
discovery, however, was unanimously indorsed as an unprecedented matter
of fact, tangible to your own and the initiated senses of your
associates, and in no way improbable, although reduced to the extreme
limits of believing divisibility.

From the insatiable desire of your personal friends, and the few court
magnates admitted to the secret, to see and read your letter, in proof
of the reality of the discovery, it has become extremely dilapidated;
besides, the encroachments of memento clippings have in some parts
reached the text. From the almost realized probability of its becoming
illegible it is the general wish of the members, expressed in a series
of resolutions, that you should retain the duplicate to be filed in the
recorded transactions of the Society on your return. Of this you may be
sure, from the reverence bestowed upon the one received, in after years
it will be esteemed as a relic of attraction sufficient for the
liquidation of any emergency to which the Society may become subject
from revolution or invasion. By the adoption of this advisable
precaution the discovery will be preserved for the perpetual honor and
benefit of the Society, as an index of its preëminent claims above those
of rival societies and associations in foreign countries. We shall not
for the future presume to offer you advice for the direction of your
investigations, but in your next communication the Society would be
pleased to learn from the Manatitlan naturalists the number and species
of the Giga animals that are at present represented in Animalculan life.
If your researches have developed other racial peculiarities in the
interim they will serve as a digestive stimulant to the doubtful.

The society has elected, by a unanimous vote, Mr. Welson, Mr. Dow, and
Captain Greenwood, corresponding members, and the Padre Simon, Jack, and
Bill (you neglected to write the names of the last mentioned in full),
honorary fellows. This is a step toward liberalism quite unprecedented
in the annals of the Society. Their election, however, was held as a
politic necessity to prevent them from advancing claims of priority
under the patronage of foreign societies, as Prussia now intends to
maintain her position as a—if not the—leading nation of Europe, which
the reputation of her Krupp’s cannon have gained. I am recommended to
hint the necessity of precaution in keeping watch over their movements,
lest by surreptitious publication of the discovery, the honors of the
Society dependent upon priority might be imperiled. Your personal
friends send three household tympano-microscopes, suited for dining-room
entertainment and post-prandial speeches. Herr Dollynitzen, the eminent
toy architect, to whom the discovery was communicated as a state secret,
has exercised his utmost skill in the erection and adornment of the
palaces intended for the Manatitlan Dosch and his advisors; also in the
arrangement of the Court suites for the production of magnificent
effects. The appointments of the lesser buildings and accommodations for
attache’s attendants, are in admirable keeping with the grandeur of the
design. The buildings are supplied with all the modern improvements and
appliances for the distribution of gas and water, for illumination and
lavatory purposes. The brewery, stables, and distillery, are without the
chief inclosure in the rear. The punch bowls, bier glasses, and state
table service of plate, if found too cumbersome for use, will serve as
monuments for the memorial attestation of our artistic skill. In fact,
you will be surprised with the skill exhibited in the accomplishment of
the undertaking, in all that appertains to durability and finished
taste, when you consider the short space of time allowed for its
completion. Imperial majesty, and the prince of diplomats, have promised
to find time to offer you their autographical greetings for the honors
you have conferred upon the crown by your important discoveries, which
will be sanctioned in acceptance with the double approval of our august
bird of prey, as token of recognized merit.

                                  Yours truly,
                                      Per order of the R. H. B. Society,
                                                    BUGWITZS, _Sec_.

N. B. (Entre nous.) If you can send us (liberals) a codified formula of
the Manatitlan system of education (under cover to me), it might be used
as a reformatory basis for a revolutionary movement to effect the rescue
of governmental power from the arbitrary sway of the legitimate few.
Anything new, with the reputation of an experienced trial of six or
seven thousand years, would serve as a subject for public speaking and
talk; for as the Manatitlans say, the liberal and radical democracy of
our race are attracted by the sonorous bellowings of the physically
strong lunged leaders of herd, and amused in dalliance with the softly
toned melody of the lowing kine. B.

                  *       *       *       *       *

M. Hollydorf, after reading the secretary’s letter, would have
suppressed the autographic missive; but the Dosch called his attention
to it,—laughingly adding, that he had been advised of the contents by a
third party, who was present during the process of dictation. Observing
the flush that mounted to M. Hollydorf’s face, he said, “I perceive that
our system of espionage is not fully sanctioned by your thoughts. But as
our object is devoid of instinctive curiosity and malice, and solely
devoted to the emancipation of your race from the impositions of
selfishness, you will upon mature consideration approve of our course.
We are fully aware of the difficulty you experience in divesting
yourselves of the reverential awe inspired by the sounding appellations
of king, emperor, prince, and other titles bestowed for self-gratulation
in the flights of vanity. But if you will analyze the charter privileges
conferred with these vapory titles, you will find that patents of
nobility are the real talons of your standard emblem of nationality,
which allows the grantee to become a participator with the imperial or
kingly beak, in rending the spoils of oppression. In truth, the whole
structure of your mythological and classical literature, upon which the
anointed supremacy of kingly and noble power rests, is as vague and
shadowy in its reflection, as a source of awe, as the sun photograph of
an ass’s ears upon the ground for the intimidation of their owner.

“The privileged follies of the upper ranks, rather than their wisdom,
is, from the contrasted meanness of self, the instinctive cause of
reverential fear with the poverty stricken. The man who will accept the
direction of others, when obliged to dissemble his own follies, not only
contravenes the manifest indications of Creative intention, but demeans
the natural honesty of his instinct below brute capacity. It is also
equally evident that a man who will not deal honestly with himself, is
not only unworthy, but will betray the trust reposed in him by others,
and as an apostate to his human privilege demeans his instinct as far
below the reach of the lower orders as his capabilities are above. With
this class, who ape the privilege of ruling others when lacking the will
for self-control, our espionage is no treason, but the study of
instinct, devoted to selfish gratification, in search of means for
emancipation. The craft of the diplomat, whose foxy instinct endeavors
to fix the incentive stigma of a causeless war upon neighboring nations,
as the precursor of slaughtered millions, for the absorption of coveted
territory, should prove a source of reprobation, rather than praise, to
the peaceful perceptions of instinct.”

In illustration of the covetous nature of the letter, which from the
patriotic sympathy of shame you would withhold, we will state from the
basis of auramental experience, that the victory of Germany over her
Gallic neighbor, who lacked the leading energies of a man capable of
controlling with inspired confidence her armies, will prove far worse
than a defeat for the continued prosperity of the country. This is
especially evident to our perceptions, as it has stimulated the policy
of preparing the means while lying in wait for a pretext to absorb the
coveted northern seaboard, under the present national control of
Belgium, Holland, Denmark, and Russia. Flattered by the prestige she has
gained from consolidation, she forgets that her Gallic achievement was
solely dependent upon fortuitous circumstances. With a mind capable of
commanding unity of action, France would prove more than her equal in
the battle field, of which the elder Bonaparte gave evidence in
controlling the powers of Europe. You will perceive by the tendency of
this prelude that we are fully prepared for the propositions contained
in your autographic letter, which will of itself attest to our
protective right of espionage, and will render it:—

                                               KAISERLANT, _Aug._, 187-.

MY DEAR HOLLYDORF, you will be pleased to hear that we hold the French
disposition still handsomely in check, by fomentations skillfully
applied by our prince of diplomats. But his mind is too expansive for
the frivolity of cultivating the natural mushroom tendency of the Celt
for intestine irruption. More anon! we have a conception in the womb of
the future! Your discovery is truly astonishing! Many of the scientific
scarcely credit it! Why not? It’s easy to believe if you only think so.
A glance at Alsace and Lorraine for instance. Will the Manatitlans
acknowledge fealty to Prussia in recognition of our rights of priority?
Push the Dosch gently on the subject. It will be of advantage to the
Dosch to subscribe for our protection, as we shall soon assume the
leading role of Europe, which England can’t gainsay. You are authorized
to act as our vice-imperator for the execution of a protectorate
annexation. In case of obduracy how large a force of our veterans would
you require for their subjugation? Answer in your next. The prince
advises expectant treatment, with such placebos as your better knowledge
of the characteristics of their blind side may suggest. As the
giantescoes could be made especially useful in diplomacy and warlike
operations, which with our progressive enterprise may soon occur, the
enlistment of two or more corps would enable us to anticipate the moves
of the enemy. The prince thinks it advisable to enlist a corps that
understands the French language, as we are obliged to keep a sharp eye
in that direction. We have also thought it advisable to keep the
discovery a secret among ourselves for the present. Ask the Dosch if he
can approximate in calculation the number of our animalculan subjects in
Prussia, and learn where their chief cities are located! Would it not be
well to have an animalculan survey of the empire, under Manatitlan
engineers, for its topographical division into departments? You have, by
the advice of the prince, been enrolled as a candidate for the honors of
knighthood, and will hereafter be designated as the Count Palatine of
Heraclea, and Viceroy of Manatitla. The king herald of the royal
commandery only awaits the transmission of their national escutcheons
for incorporation with the Prussian, and quarterings of your family,
before the announcement of your full investment and title will be
proclaimed. The prince of diplomats advises gentle dissimulation in the
inceptive stages of your negotiations with the Manatitlans; and in the
second insinuations with non-committal or evasive attachments; and
boldness when fully prepared to offer your ultimatum. This plan worked
admirably with the French, who are probably far more accomplished in the
diplomatic art than the Manatitlans. If you had experienced the
advantages of a married life, you could better appreciate the benefits
of the preparatory stages proposed, from their successful adaptability
for the quiet management of domestic affairs. We shall anticipate with
increased interest the arrival of your next letters. Please present the
Kaiser pipe to Dr. Baāhar with its accompanying sack of Latakia and
Shiraz ammunition, as its smoke will aid him in resurrecting many
interesting items from the ruins of old Heraclea. The gift you can
render more acceptable by an appropriate presentation speech, at the
close of a public banquet given at our expense. If you think it will
enhance the acceptability of the gift, you can allude to its dedication
by my own and the lips of the prince, which will be sure to impart to
him a politic shrewdness that will outwit the Jesuits.

                                                            YOUR KAISER.

M. Hollydorf acknowledged with a flush of shame the correctness of the
Dosch’s verbatim rendering of the Kaiser letter. But the Dosch rallied
him with the assurance that the effort was above the general average of
the kind, and really acceptable as an aid in demonstrating the
indifference of potentates for the real welfare of their subjects. “If,”
he urged, “Newton, Humboldt, Arago, and other scientific celebrities,
had occupied but half of the time in study for the practical relief of
their race from the potential rule of selfishness, that they devoted to
theories strained from debris gleanings of earth’s attritions, from
counter elementary action, they would have secured in grateful
reciprocation an ever enduring immortality, that would have lived with
the endowment of their living impression, in the current of affection,
to the garnered end of the allotted term of mortal representation.
Instead of using their gigantic endowments for the development of man’s
knowledge of himself, in privileged relation to creative design, for the
fulfillment of indications vouchsafed for his affectionate direction,
they endeavored to illuminate the precedental path of irrational
delusions, and left their immense labors, under the seal of acknowledged
greatness, as barren of sympathy for immortal direction, as the sands of
Sahara are for the support of the Arab wanderer. We do not disclaim the
collateral benefits to be derived from the cultivation of practical
“science,” but to devote one’s energies to exhuming relics, tracing
glacial tracks, chasing butterflies and other insects, for capture,
without other motive than for classification and the gratification of
curiosity, is as void of beneficial result as the youthful Gigas’
antiquarian search for postage stamps. The obstinate perseverance of the
Scotch Animalculans in imitating the fanatical absurdities of their Giga
exemplars, has become proverbial with our Manatitlan colonists, who
render it “scratching for miracles to cure evils of easy prevention.” A
reputation founded solely upon entomological pursuits will deservedly
prove as short lived, and lack-worthy of sympathy, as the ancient family
hunts of the Gaels, who left a breeding cause for wasted time spent in
the pursuit of their bodies’ parasitic foes, when with ease they could
have rid themselves of the pests, and added to their comfort by
cleanliness. In our aerial study of botanical adaptation, we have
observed the date palm, indigenous to the eastern shores of the
Mediterranean, growing at the mouths of all the large American rivers of
tropical latitudes, corresponding with the current streams of the ocean
setting from the Strait of Gibraltar. In Mexico and Yucatan, the date
palm grows as luxuriantly, and yields as abundantly in exotic
transplantation as under the favoring influences of native soil and
climate. Even in the latifundium with its exalted altitude, you will
observe that with cultivation it yields fruit of a quality far superior
to the Egyptian, and has in reality proved the bread of life to the
Heracleans. Now if the scientific of your race would but study these
vicarious indications of nature for transplanting increase, and
cultivate them in extension with intelligent zeal for affectionate
bestowal, war, and its indigent charity sequence of doles, would forever
pass away from the surplant of confiding love. But your race are now so
wedded to the fruits of precedentalism, that if you, on your return to
the haunts of civilization, should attempt to promulgate your present
happy thoughts, without forestalling them with the substantial relation
of your animalculan discovery of the Manatitlan race, your own relatives
would denounce you as lunatic Utopiasts.”




                             CHAPTER XXII.


As the four were returning from the auriculum to the quarters of the
corps, a week or more after the padre’s return, he overtook them and
listened to their conversation unperceived. As each entertained one or
two Manatitlan aura-lists in his ear, the conversation was strangely
diversified in irrelevancy, which would have caused a stranger to the
events transpiring, possessed with the least taint of superstition, to
have supposed them insane or bewitched. The padre listened with
wondering attraction to catch the drift of their mirthful sallies,
hoping to learn the cause, or obtain a clew to their mysterious
convocations. Their incoherent address of questions, which although
unanswered, appeared to provoke outbursts of merriment, in one, without
attracting the least notice from the others, caused him at first to
think it was the prelude to one of Mr. Welson’s practical essays of
humor designed to entrap him. But the earnest manner in which the
conversation was conducted, and the unmistakable evidences of genuine
mirth, put this conjecture to flight. His next suggestive impression was
ushered in with a shudder; could it be possible that they were subject
to a spell of enchantment, and that the seeming city of Heraclea was the
abode of enchanters, the spirits of darkness against which the fathers
had especially warned the heedless? This frightful ghost of a suspicion
received such evident confirmation that he immediately had recourse to
his rosary that had been bestowed by Fraile Gallagato, of Amelcoy, for
numbering exorcising prayers. The rattling of the beads, with the
muttering sound of his Ave Marias, attracted the attention of Mr.
Welson, as he turned aside to allow the others to enter the puerta in
advance, and he for the first time became aware of the padre’s presence.
The anxious dismay of the padre’s countenance revealed the source of his
emotions, prompting Mr. Welson to play upon his fears, but the Dosch
auramented the inquiry:—

“Well padre, what is it that causes you to look so frightened?”

_Padre._ “Wha-wha-what does it all mean, I should like to know? Are you
bewitched or leagued with the devil [crossing himself], or what are you
doing at any rate? I wish to goodness I had gone back to Montevideo!”

_Mr. Welson._ “Are you not comfortable, padre? Just tell us what you
lack, and we will endeavor to supply your wants. The prætor has within
an hour made particular inquires for your welfare.”

_Padre._ “It’s not that, I have everything my body requires,—but my
conscience,—my mind,—I declare upon the welfare of my soul, I can’t
endure the thoughts of subjecting myself any longer to the temptations
of the evil one.”

_Mr. Welson._ “Why padre, there is nothing to my knowledge that should
alarm your conscience, or soul, for we are only holding intercourse with
human beings, and as you must feel from your own thoughts, we are
farther from evil than ever in our lives before. Ease your mind from
alarm, and suspicious fears, for in good and seasonable time everything
that now appears mysterious will be explained for your privileged
understanding. For your assurance and relief from imaginary fears, you
have only to turn your thoughts to your own improvement, both mental and
physical; which should convince you that from whatever source derived,
the influence is good. Do we not appear far more happy here, than on
board of the _Tortuga_? If you would but think, and give heed to the
promptings of your thoughts, you could not fail to realize that the
source of your happiness is derived from an example of purity and
goodness, and of necessity, in direct opposition to evil.”

_Padre._ “But I have had warnings clear and distinct, as from the voice
of a spirit, in a still small voice, as if coming from afar. Then at
another time, I felt like one possessed with thoughts that were not his
own, and could not do as I had been taught, without self-reproof, and
was lead away from parental instruction, and my Christian education. In
fact, as it were, I have been prevented from keeping company with my own
conscience, and could not pray and do as I liked.”

_Mr. Welson_ (losing his prompted direction). “But you did attempt to do
as you liked, when the viper offered visible objection to your taking
the dried tobacco leaves in the garden of the old mission of Amyntas, in
passing on your way to Amelcoy.”

The padre’s consternation when exposed to the reared head of the
viper,—which had in fact darted from its coil upon a leaf beneath the
one the padre’s hand was approaching, and struck its fangs into the
loose sleeve of his coat,—was not greater than from this display of
“second sight,” on the part of Mr. Welson, which revealed a scene that
he felt confident was only known to himself and Fraile Gallagato, to
whom he confessed in Amelcoy. Staring upon Mr. Welson with eyes aghast,
he staggered backward with hands upraised, in repellant attitude, as if
deprecatingly warding off some dangerous influence that had possessed
itself of his personal embodiment.

_Mr. Welson_ (laughing). “There now, you have tempted me to play with
your superstitions, or rather I have been tempted. Be content for the
present, and in time all will be revealed to you in freedom from
supernatural agency.”

With this parting admonition Mr. Welson entered the house. The padre,
after he had sufficiently recovered the use of his faculties, uttered in
self-defense an abjuring protest of two Marias, kissing in addenda the
beads and cross with transubstantial desire for their seal of effectual
grace, then soliloquized: “They can’t convince me that they are not
leagued with the spirit of darkness; and if I live to see the morrow’s
sun I’ll shake the dust,—well, if they had any,—off the soles of my
feet, if I am obliged to traverse the paths of the wilderness that
separates me from civilization alone.”

As if to put his intention into immediate execution he walked rapidly
down the avenue of the latifundium and out of the gate; but when
skirting the copse of the temple grove he met the Heraclean herdsmen and
their wives. Their jocund mirth, sportive with songs and gladness,
withdrew his thoughts from self by their grateful tokens of affection
bestowed in the full outflow of joyful greeting, which caused him to
forget his impressions of their enchantment from supernatural agency,
and he was soon engaged, with Manatitlan aid, in the laughing exchange
of Latin and English terms of idiomatic phrase. On his return to the
quarters of the corps suspicion had been banished from his memory; but
his doubts and fears were again revived, when on entering the dining-
room he encountered the same mysterious impression of a communion with
the presence of unseen spirits. The entrance of Dr. Baāhar, with the
buzz and genealogical curators of sound, dispelled the influence, but
they, as well as the padre, had questioned the source of its power.
After the evening meal the padre sought the opportunity of renewing his
petition for permission to depart in the morning; anointing it with
grateful acknowledgments for their kindness to him personally, while in
the style of exorcism he urged the necessity with the quotation, “What
shall it profit a man if he gain the whole world and lose his own soul?”
The effect of this appeal, for instinctive self-preservation, was so
comical in its misplaced application that the four were obliged to join
the auriculars in giving gleeful vent to their mirth; this, however, was
as suddenly checked, when their supposed derisive lack of sympathy
affected the padre to the extent of producing tears. Unable to restrain
his contempt for the selfimposed shallowness of the padre’s perception,
Mr. Welson,—under the auricular direction of Corycæus, the familiar who
attended him on his journey,—gave a final touch to his victim’s
superstitious fears, by asking: “Did your conscience or soul find
themselves in a purer atmosphere, or in less suspicious companionship,
when subjected by Fraile Gallagato to the sacramental spirits of a
Rosario punch, and the fumes of tobacco, than with us who have abjured
their use? You need not answer upon the impulse of the moment; but if,
after a night’s reflection, your fears for your soul’s safety still
prompt you to leave us, and the affectionate interest enlisted in your
behalf on the part of the Heracleans and Kyronese, the means for your
conveyance to Amelcoy and deliverance into the keeping of your noble
compadre shall not be wanting. But in bidding you a personal farewell,
from your self-will in adhering to delusions that require proxied aid
granted from confession and absolution administered by a being so
manifestly corrupt as the Fraile Gallagato, we shall be obliged to
forego the hopeful retaining interest that we feel in your welfare,
unless by the contrast, your thoughtful eyes are opened to see and feel
the great loss you will have sustained in the sacrifice of truthful and
affectionate sincerity.”

_Padre._ “But why, Mr. Welson, have you kept from me anything that it
was proper and useful for the rest of you to know.”

_Mr. Welson._ “In the first place, you were not particularly interested
in scientific investigations, or book lore, else you would have
participated in the discovery that has puzzled and alarmed you. In the
second place, as you represented the instinctive class of ritualistic
habit and creed followers, who believe in what they have been taught
without questioning palpable absurdities, you have been exhibited to us
as an illustration of the unthinking characteristics of our race. As you
have subserved the purpose of showing the irrational subterfuges of
sectarianism for shirking the responsibilities of honest example, for
the delusive indulgence of instinctive desire in excess of reasonable
gratification, I will now inform you that shortly after our arrival in
Heraclea we were introduced, through the reflecting aid of the tympano-
microscope, to a race of human Animalculans, by Mistress Correliana.
These had been known to her Heraclean ancestors for many centuries, and
were the originators of their system of education. The largest, or
giantescoes as they are called, are perceptible in form to our unaided
eyes; but, with a few exceptions, they belong solely to the Manatitlans,
the race to which we were introduced. But the lower grades, which are
styled mediums and tits, are in human resemblance indistinctly visible
to the naked eye. The falcons, that visited Mistress Correliana on board
of the _Tortuga_, were guided by individuals of this race, which
accounts for their wonderful sagacity, and the mysterious intelligence
which she had gained of the transactions of our race while immured
within the walls of Heraclea. When M. Hollydorf commenced his
investigations for tracing the relation of the dry, animalculan species
with the representatives of our gigantic orders, the thought never
occurred to his imagination that by any possibility the initial type of
humanity would be discovered. You will now be able to judge, from your
impressions, our emotions when we were obliged to recognize under the
powerful reflection of the tympano-microscope our own representative
embodiment in minute miniature; but with a perfection in beauty that put
the pretensions of our race to shame. The object of the R. H. B.
Society, was, as you have heard explained,—to obtain a knowledge of
aboriginal animalculan dryad life for comparison with kindred species
within the influence of civilization to judge of its progressive
effects. As Dr. Baāhar was too much occupied with his naturalistic
pursuits to attend on the day of discovery, he with the other members
were held in probationary ignorance of the new race for experimental
effects, allied to those to which you have been subject. You can now
ponder for the night upon the revelation I have given you, and if to-
morrow you wish for tangible evidence of its truth you can accompany us
to the auriculum.”

The padre had directed his attention chiefly to Mr. Welson during his
admonitory explanation, with eyes amazedly questioning the faces of the
others for confirmation, and mouth agape, which at certain passages of
the rehearsal contracted with grimaced efforts to swallow; but with the
closing invitation he relapsed into a ruminating mood of fitful
cogitation. In this condition he remained, scarcely noticing the return
of Dr. Baāhar and curators of sound, notwithstanding they were subjected
to auramental impression for his especial detection, and proof
edification, from the incongruous lack of method shown in their
conversation, which the doctor, with aptness, styled the languaged
lowing salutations of the herd at nightfall. Corycæus, the padre’s
auramental familiar, reported his ruminations at the hour of retiring to
Mr. Welson, who sought the opportunity to give them direction by reading
to him a postscript of Captain Greenwood’s letter, containing
information that he was too much vexed to give him by word of mouth at
Amelcoy. Calling the padre into the colonnade, after the other members
of the corps had retired, he read the captain’s announcement to him by
moonlight, which we will render verbatim:—

“P. S. The padre’s appearance, with the knowledge that he had passed the
major portion of the night in drinking, smoking, and chewing, with
Fraile Gallagato, who conducted him in a state of inebriation to the
house of a woman of unmentionable fame, so annoyed me that I held no
communication with him, and write that which it would have afforded me
unalloyed pleasure to have imparted to him, by word of mouth, if he had
been in a worthy condition. Please inform him that our success in
collecting gold on the spits of the Pilcomayo, during our return trip
down the river, so far exceeded our personal requirements, after equally
sharing with the absent in Heraclea, that we have, at the suggestion of
Jack and Bill,—who rightfully aver that he was the discoverer,—set aside
a sufficient amount for insuring his family an ample token of his
fatherly remembrance and desire for their welfare. The amount will be
forwarded to the address of any reliable person he may name, subject to
his childrens’ order.

                                                               T. R. G.”

The padre at the close of the message gave one audible gulp of choking
shame, and sank down upon the pavement in groveling attitude, exclaiming
in broken accents of woful misery, “unworthy brute that I am!” In this
condition Mr. Welson left him, with a simple parting salutation.
Corycæus, in the morning, reported that he continued prone and imbecile
in thought, until lunar impression caused his scattered faculties to
become wild in intention, causing him to utter vehemently the talismanic
Giga word, Reform! But as its suggestions encouraged moderation, as the
source of saving grace, he wandered forth into the herald darkness of
the morning’s dawn. Directing his steps in the gray light to the summit
fora, his thoughts were led to view,—in the emergence of day, from the
chill sombre darkness of night, as the first radiant rays of sunlight
appeared above the horizon,—the bright perspective of Heraclean
affection which began to dawn with its warmth and purity, beckoning him
from the gloom of the past, with the determination that his example
should contrast with it, as a day of light for the guidance of future
generations in the path of happiness. As he stood in the rolling mist
wafted by the air current of the falls, on its nourishing mission to the
latifundium, Mr. Welson joined the prætor’s family to unite with them in
their morning salutations. In turning their eyes upward to catch the
first rays of the sun on the brink of the falls, the head of the padre
appeared enveloped in a cloud of mist. When first discovered, his
attention seemed to be attracted to objects beyond the walls; but with
the first strains of the morning anthem he removed his hat and united
his voice in the song of praise. At its close, he beckoned them to join
him on the summit terrace. The prætor understanding the invitation,
challenged Mr. Welson and Dr. Baāhar to a trial of speed, with his wife
and daughter, up the ascent. Accepting the gage they started, the
civilized competitors taking the shorter and direct avenue from the city
gate. At the word, up the crescent avenue Correliana and her mother sped
with equal steps, gliding upward in the pathway with graceful motions,
and swiftness rivaling the fabled Camilla’s, the prætor following with a
steady movement of practiced ease, content to hold his starting distance
good. The padre’s past and future, as umpire of this novel race, quickly
merged into the present. With jubilant mirth he urged the doctor, with
hand and hat, to greater speed for the honor of the corps. But from the
weissich of the falling water his words of encouragement failed to reach
the object of his admonition. In the abandon of momentary excitement,
his gestures were of that comical cast that we should expect from a man
who had been aroused from a slumber that had continued from youth to
age, and installed, when suddenly awakened, to preside as umpire over a
scene like the one in review, without comprehending his growth in
stature. On all, except the toiling object of his exhortations, his
pantomimic gesticulations served as brakes to stay their speed. The
diminution in speed of the prætorial family became quite apparent from
their mirthful checks; and Mr. Welson, who had for a time maintained an
increasing distance in advance of the doctor, came to a full stop at the
foot of the summit incline, where the latter passed him, attributing his
disability to shortness of breath from overhaste in the beginning.
Congratulating himself upon his own prudence in reserving his strength
for the last stretch, the doctor reached the summit, but was chagrined
to find the prætor and family awaiting his arrival at the goal. The
padre, forgetful of his night’s vigil, and the cause, bantered Dr.
Baāhar upon his signal defeat; but an inquiring look from Mr. Welson
reminded him of his petition, and he became silent until asked, when
descending, why he had beckoned them to the summit fora?

“Well, I declare,” he replied, “your race put it out of my mind
altogether; but I wanted you to see what a beautiful effect the morning
sun had upon the scenery.”

Correliana referred him to the visit he had paid to the summit in
company with Cleorita and Oviata on the morning after his return from
Amelcoy; a reference that caused him to become blushingly silent. Mr.
Welson then informed the prætor and family that the padre and Dr. Baāhar
had already been initiated into the object of their secret convocations,
and that from henceforth there would be no reservations in conversation.




                             CHAPTER XXIII.


The padre on his return to the quarters of the corps, found Mr. Dow
alone, and questioned him upon the sincerity of Mr. Welson’s revelation.
“You know,” he said, “that I am a sort of orphan waif among you, in the
matter of science, which Mr. Welson, Dr. Baāhar, and others, with the
exception of yourself, have taken advantage for their amusement; not
that they have treated me unkindly or disrespectfully; but when they saw
me really anxious from fear, which they could have relieved, it was hard
that they should tease and add to my perplexity.”

Mr. Dow assured him that the revelations of Mr. Welson were strictly
true, and that whatever was at variance with their former selves had
been effected by Manatitlan wisdom. He then asked Corycæus, if present,
to give a joint pull upon the most sensitive vibrilla in the padre’s
ear. His sudden start, with the tearful winking of his eyes, gave
evidence that the Manatitlans were still there. Seeing that the old
mythical idea of spirit possession still lingered, he asked them to sing
in chorus Old Lang Syne, as that was the only tune the padre could
recognize. This was so well rendered in sympathetic harmony that the
padre beat time with both hands, and at its close exclaimed, “My
goodness gracious, I never heard such music; why it thrilled me through
and through, yet the voices seemed small, and far off, as if they came
from the heavenly realms of bliss!”

After the morning meal the padre was escorted to the auriculum by all
the initiated, including the mayorong and his family. The padre having
been placed in a favorable position for hearing and seeing, at an
appointed signal a large number of giantescoes, mediums, and tits,
suddenly appeared on the reflecting platform of the tympano-microscope,
with a movement so quick that neither action or source of emergence
could be detected. The suddenness of their appearance caused the quick
adjournment of the padre’s hand to his hair, its usual place of resort
when his faculties were surprised with doubts requiring the aid of
counter-irritation for elucidation. The Dosch and Doschessa advanced to
the front of the platform, and after a reciprocal introduction to the
padre, the former plainly stated the reason why a portion had been
excluded from a knowledge of their existence. It was not, however, until
a full hour had passed in the discussion of various topics relating to
Manatitlan influence, that the padre ventured to speak. He then timidly
inquired of the Dosch, “Do you and your wife and the rest of the
Manatitlans feel quite like men and comfortable?”

_Dosch._ “You can rest assured that we all feel like men,—except our
women,—and really comfortable!”

_Padre._ “Are your women in being smaller less comfortable than the
men?”

_Dosch._ “As you perceive, they hold the same relative proportion with
regard to size as the females of your own race. But if they were larger,
perhaps the men would feel less comfortable. You know from experience
that women wield a strong influence upon whichever side they lend their
weight.”

_Padre._ “Do you cook your food or eat it raw?”

_Dosch._ “We are, like your own race, omnivorous, but select and adapt
our food to the healthy requirements of our bodies, using fire for its
preparation.”

_Padre._ “But how can you make such small fires?”

_Dosch._ “We hold ourselves in advance of your race in that respect, as
we are not dependent upon material combustion for our fires. You are, of
course, laboring under the impression that our small size must embarrass
the organic functions. But in the intensity of the spark you will find
an apt illustration of the vital energy that we have been enabled to
preserve in the purity of its brightness. Although you may esteem it a
spark of egoism, we can, with truth, assert that we feel free from the
vagaries of appetite and lust, and an infinitesimal concentration of
vitality that imparts purity to our impressions. This exemption from the
ills to which you are subject in the flesh, we have obtained by the
consistent cultivation of our perceptive endowments bestowed by the
Creator as an heirloom independent of the body’s material tenement. For
your enlightenment with reference to the physical coöperation of our
educated perceptions with the body, I will say that we possess, from
transmitted cultivation, a nervous and muscular energy, with a sensitive
perception, that enables us to detect and guard against dangers while
yet distant. In sudden emergency, by our agile presence of mind, we can,
without extraordinary effort, avoid impending danger, that would
inevitably prove fatal to your slower faculties of apprehension. That
you may appreciate, in a measure, the quickness of our movements,
Corycæus, the padre’s familiar, will pass from the platform to his ear.”

_Corycæus._ “Yes, and he may catch me if he can.”

Quick as our eyes were turned on the padre, the change in direction was
anticipated by Corycæus, for he was back on the platform in time to see
with laughing glee the padre’s hand reach his ear with a clap that
jarred his head. But certain of his capture, the padre, without noticing
the return of Corycæus to the stage, cautiously introduced his
forefinger into the cavity of his ear, with his thumb on the alert to
secure his prisoner when raised to the surface. So certainly intent was
he of the capture, that he was deaf to the suppressed laughter provoked
by his movements, until after the removal and cautious separation of his
thumb and finger; then his surprise was greeted by a genial outburst.
Discovering Corycæus on the platform, one of his old furtive glances of
superstition crossed the bridge of his nose, the laughing jeers causing
him to exclaim, “Well you can think what you like, but the devil’s in
it!”

_Corycæus._ “If you mean in your ear, the compliment is not intended for
me!”

The rejoinder, and mirth, caused the padre to propose a second trial;
this proving as unsuccessful as the first, he exclaimed, “You are
altogether too spry for my catching; I’d sooner try to catch a flea on
the watch! But the fact is, I can’t quite make you out to my mind. You
seem to be what you say you are; still there is neither sacred or
profane authority for your existence, unless we take the Fathers’
assurance that it’s possible for evil spirits to assume any form, or
shape, or preach any doctrine they choose, for the purpose of
temptation, of which numerous instances have been recorded by Frey
Manuel Jaen, and other sacred authors.”

_Mr. Welson_ (impatiently). “The fact is apparent, padre, that you are
either stupidly incorrigible or there is a prompted method in your
mythological vagaries, to show us how loath your kind are to give up
animal indulgences that can be absolved by confession. Once for all! Why
is it that you have been endowed with the power of discernment, which
you style conscience, to judge between right and wrong, except to assert
your probationary privilege to a higher destiny than sensually begot
animal life that is subject to compostic defilement and corruption? Or
why should you be preferred to a material heaven above the beasts of the
field, who have lived in accordance with their special capacities, while
you have defiled yours with beastly indulgences? Like yourself we have
been subject to auramentation, but have thankfully accepted the
promptings bestowed for the enlightenment and correction of our
perceptions. We feel that although bodily present, you are not with us.”

_Padre._ “It was yourself, Mr. Welson, that made me cautious! If I have
doubted the evidences of my senses, your deceptions have placed the
stumbling block in my way. Since we have been in Heraclea your mysteries
whenever I was present kept me on the lookout that I might not be caught
napping. Besides all the Kyronese children had disappeared, except the
infants, and those over ten years of age. While among the Heracleans
there was not a miss or master, except Correliana; or a married man or
woman less than twenty-four years of age. When I inquired the cause, you
said they were at school, which did not seem consistent, for I could
find no signs of one within the walls. Then as there were no churches or
signs of religious worship, my fears were excited; for you rose with the
sun and welcomed its rising with songs, something you had never
attempted to do before; for even after a jovial night, spent in
drinking, playing poker, and lansquenet, you appeared more sorry than
glad to see it. After breakfast you avoided me and betook yourselves to
some strange place, so that through the day I scarcely saw you. These
and many other strange freaks made me feel as though I had really
strayed into an enchanted city; which impression was strengthened by my
own contradictory thoughts. (Looking curiously at Corycæus.) Often a
distinct small voice, but as plain as my own, would dispute the number
of my Ave Marias, although I had numbered them on my rosary—there, now,
is the same voice asking me from what the beads were made. Well as there
can be no secrets kept here, I might as well own, that plug tobacco was
the easiest thing that I could make them of. Indeed I scarcely knew the
half that I was thinking, I became so confused and bewildered. Sometimes
I thought my impressions were caused by your scientific tricks, played
upon me when asleep; but then there was no authority for that; so you
will see from all that I have said, I am hardly in a condition to give
credit to my senses, upon the question of these apparitions, that you
call Manatitlan Animalculans, as to whether they are real humans, or
spirits of evil conjured by the devil to betray souls to damnation.”

_Corycæus._ “But you know, padre, you tried all sorts of exorcisms to
get rid of me without effect, until you traced my exhortations to your
ears, and supposing they might arise from defect, you smeared your ears
with tobacco spittle, which proved an effectual remedy.”

_Padre_ (laughing). “You must allow then that tobacco is good for
ridding one of an annoyance?”

_Corycæus._ “If you call good advice an annoyance!”

_Dr. Baāhar._ “He is wedded to his delusions, and with eyes and ears,
refuses to see and hear.”

_Padre._ “You may call my religion a delusion, and a budget of
traditional superstitions, or whatever you like, but I shall never
become an apostate until I can find a better, under proof to supply its
place.”

_Dosch._ “It is better that he should be left to draw his own inferences
from our example and teachings, as words of reason will prove futile to
disabuse him of his bead ritualism. Possibly, Corycæus may have yielded
overmuch to his humor from the obstinacy of the padre’s infatuations.”

_Corcyra_ (wife of Corycæus). “With permission, it would please me to
suggest in behalf of our auramental labors with the padre, that we had
not the power of controlling him with the privilege of exampled
pleadings, so we were obliged to have recourse to stratagem to rescue
him from the toils of Fraile Gallagato and his own weakness.”

_Padre_ (gaspingly). “Wa-wa-was—”

_Corcyra._ “Yes, we always attend our husbands, as our bonds of
affection are inseparable, and independent of bodily duality. But you
need not be so much alarmed, although we are free to acknowledge that we
were greatly shocked to see your kindly nature self-betrayed for its own
degradation, in a manner so revolting to our impressions of purity.”

The padre bowed his head to conceal his face, flushed with shameful
self-reproaches. The Dosch diverted attention from the padre by
introducing Codecio, who proposed to give a synoptical description of
the advantages imparted from their system of education, which would be
exemplified by a visit to the Heraclean schools.

“In rendering our homage of grateful affection to Inovatus Desiderata
for the inestimable boon of an educated power of self-control over the
body’s instincts, founded upon unselfish reciprocation, we also with
equal fervency correspond with Analogius, his successor, who perfected
the founder’s system with the censor’s safeguard.

“_The Censor’s_ duty commences immediately after birth, at the
completion of the nurse’s midwife assistance rendered to the mother, as
upon her this aid naturally devolves. In no instance has there ever
occurred the necessity of man’s intervention with this function, which
innate delicacy declares repugnant to modest purity. The censor then in
conjunction with the nurse, who remains as a constant guard, directs the
parents for the adaptation of affectionate solicitation for the welfare
of the child. With constant study the natural inclinations of the child
are led and trained for the healthy reciprocation of purity and
goodness; also for the recognition of cause and effect in progressive
degree sufficient for the enlistment of truthful confidence. But a few
generations passed after the censorship was matured by Analogius before
the querulous whimperings of infancy had ceased altogether. When at the
close of the second year they entered the nursery department of the
national schools, the children were as self-capable and independent of
aid for the adjustment of dress to their persons as though they had been
to the manner born. In like respect their practical appreciation of
cleanliness was as actively demonstrated in purity of intention, as with
their more experienced elders. Your people have been taught to believe
from precedental prejudice, founded upon the selfish arrogance of
ancient exemplars, that the word censor signifies an arbitrary agent for
the restriction of liberty under the rulings of tyrannical power. But as
with the tribunes of Heraclea, who act as censors under the direction of
the prætor, our privileges extend in an advisorial capacity through all
the gradations of life, from the child to parents, and in their
collective capacity, styled the people. As the censor’s vocation is to
study and cultivate, for good, the mental and physical capacity of the
child from birth, you will readily understand the advantage we obtain
for direction in all that pertains to health and the unselfish display
of goodness and purity. From the same source in reciprocation our
cultivated knowledge obtains a clue to the predilections of instinct for
vocations and variations of employment necessary for the supply of food,
and the sustaining comforts in currency for the reciprocation of
affection. But, above all, we are enabled to perfect the union of the
marriage ties by the selection of compatible respondents. You will,
however, better comprehend the method of attainment by the rehearsal of
our process of education.

“_Our Manatitlan System of Education_ commences at birth, in giving
direction to the dawning perceptions of the nursling, that its desires
may be toned to its healthy requirements. For the achievement of this
important object the exaggerated and inconsiderate fondness of the
parents requires the close attention of the nurse and censor, that the
material attractions may be strictly adapted for the development of the
child’s real necessities, in direction for its future mental and
physical welfare. At the age of two years the child is placed in the
infantile department of the national school, but still continues under
the special care of its nurse and parental censor. When the child
reaches the age of five years full matriculation takes place, as with
the expiration of the infantile term, self-care as well as self-control
have become sufficiently impressed for emulous improvement under the
exampled lead of their elders. With the full accomplishment of ten
years, the youthful term commences, with an easy initiation into the
life sustaining responsibilities of community association. But from the
earliest stage the children are familiarized with the pastime labors of
vocation. These never assume the repugnant features of tasks, but are
adopted as useful amusements, from choice, as compulsion and disciplined
correction have no part in our exampled system of education. This
electic plan of imitation enables them in after life to render needed
assistance in association, without no-vitiation, which would embarrass
the continued uniformity of household regulations, rather than aid in
their easy dispensation. Within the inclosures, of both the male and
female schools, all the appliances required in the pursuits of vocation,
and the conduction of domestic affairs, are self-supplied after the
first installment of foundation. Indeed, from youthful invention in the
school departments we are often indebted for the enhanced comforts of
affection. As the mercenary selfishness of morbid craving is unknown,
there is an affectionate solicitude with each for the others’ welfare in
joyous reciprocation. Our grade distinctions of giantesco, medium, and
tit, which are usually determined in the seventeenth year, although in
premonition from the age of ten, are those of confiding reliance and
mutual aid, in freedom from instinctive envy and arrogance.

“At the age of twenty-three the male graduates from the school inclosure
into the active degrees of life’s associate coöperation. In premonition,
the connubial censors have studied and kept a record of instinctive
traits, and characteristic blendings of affection, of the male and
female matriculants, for comparison and the selection of coaptives in
the unity of predisposition for the fulfillment of marriage intention.
On the morning of the day that accomplishes the full term of school
graduation, the man is introduced to his future wife, who has been
returned to her parent’s charge for the three month’s probationary test
of full compatibility, during which her intended enjoys their
hospitality. The adjudged unity of these marriage selections has been so
perfect in conception, that there has not been a single instance of
misapprehension, or one that failed in fulfilling the complete
assimilation of affection for sole representation, independent of
attaint from the lustful vagrancy of desire. A day of visitation for
each school is set apart for the monthly reunion of parents and
children. The happiness imparted in anticipation and realization from
these visits exceeds by far the utmost capacity of word description; but
once enjoyed they give maturity to conception for the full assurance of
an affectionate immortality.

“After your visit to the Heraclean schools, we feel assured that
‘argument’ will not be required to establish the all powerful efficiency
of the system in securing affectionate coöperation for the perfection of
self-legislation. Your governments for the compulsion of untutored
instinct, by arbitrary enactments surprised from the impulsive vagaries
begot from excessive indulgence, will then appear self condemned as
lunatic monstrosities conjured from and transmitted by hereditary
indigestion.”

At the close of Codecio’s exposition the padre, who had
listened attentively, could not withhold his approval, which he
characteristically expressed. “I declare to conscience, upon my soul, I
believe you are right! But how are we to get on with our national
mixtures, when the stronger prey upon the weaker, without laws and
government? If we are not able to govern ourselves just now,
individually and collectively, I think you must allow that it would be
hard to find a better constitution than that of the United States for
liberty?”

_Codecio._ “In answer to your inquiry, a clear demonstration of facts,
derived from auramentation, will prove all sufficient for your
comprehension of the real governmental status of the republic in
question. We have traced the progress of the United States from their
earliest date; at first with the hope of influencing the adverse
experience of the Spanish, French, Dutch, and English colonists for
lenient consolidation, despite their religious tenets, which had been
the cause of counter oppressions and expatriation. This was attempted
with the ulterior intention of effecting a cohesive tendency from a
united education, adapted to their practical requirements for real
progression in freedom from precedental imitation. But the repulsive
elements of instinct continued, under the aggravations of exile, to grow
more rampantly rabid in inveteracy, offering but little hope for the
encouragement of our efforts for kindly reconciliation. With the one
remarkable exception of the colony founded by Penn,—who tested and
proved the trustworthy natures of the savages, when subject to honorable
treatment,—the labors of our auramentors were void of effect. Of all the
colonists those of New England waged the most ruthlessly relentless war
against their aboriginal benefactors, seemingly intent upon offering
them as a grateful sacrifice for their selfish ‘freedom to worship God.’
The next inevitable stage of instinctive fanaticism, was the
inauguration of sectarian persecution, in direct rebuttal of their own
claims for sympathy, and freedom of privilege. But a few generations
passed before the old leaven of hereditary intolerance flourished its
sceptre of arbitrary compulsion with renewed vengeful despite. Then a
new bone of contention for future generations was introduced by the
mother country, who bestowed the African troglodytes as bond slaves to
work out the heavenly salvation of the colonists.

“The northern section of the country was alternated by seasons of
extreme heat and cold, that rendered the negro an incumbrance rather
than an aid, so that gradually the colonists with frugal policy
emancipated their slaves, as the second grateful sacrifice to God. But
the southern department with a semi-tropical climate, and a vegetation
spontaneously fruitful, requiring for the production of cotton, rice,
and sugar but little cultivation in comparison with the labor bestowed
upon the detrite soil of the north, was well adapted for the propagation
of the physical inertia of the negro. Also for the indulgence of their
masters’ _otium cum dignitate_ derivation from the English cavalier, the
buccaneers of the Spanish main, and subordinate admixture of Huguenotic
blood tainted with the religious fanatic absolutism demonstrated by
Calvin in friendly bestowal upon Servetus. Under these favoring
auspices, the institution of slavery flourished with the southern
department, until the increasing herds of mongrelized humanity, and a
ready market for their staple productions, brought into full play the
old leaven of arrogance. In demonstration of our maxim, that indolence
is the hatchment of vice and hot-bed for the enforcement of evil, the
southrons began to plot for ruling supremacy, stigmatizing the northern
laboring classes with comparisons that discovered in forecast the
inveteracy of premeditated hatred. In practical demonstration of
intention, after the republican era was well advanced in its first
century, they inaugurated the trial of brute force as an argument in the
national halls of legislation, not however, with the chivalric challenge
of the lion’s roar, but with the sneaking approaches of the tigress who
dares not brook manly opposition. This overt act, which plainly
indicated the design of taking piratical advantage of the supposed
pusillanimity of the northerners, for the purpose of subjecting them to
dictation as plebeians, set the doors of ‘Janus ajar,’ until with
opposing provocations, concessive on one side, and in degree aggressive
on the other, they were finally opened wide for the inception of civil
war. The comparatively healthy stamina of the laborer gained the
victory, and the slaves were liberated. Then came the problem, ‘What
shall we do with them? They are natives of the soil, and if we act
consistently we must extend to them the privileges of citizenship, and a
votive voice in governmental affairs.’ This was accorded, without any
initiatory proviso for raising them from animal disability, to an
instinctive perception of the responsibilities incurred.

“With this new element added to the antagonistic contributions of Europe
and Asia, the attraction of cohesion became more widely separated. Yet
with blind infatuation, the progressive stability of a republic of
incompatibles was still proclaimed, in defiance of your ‘sacred’
proverb, which says, that ‘a house divided against itself cannot stand.’
In fact, we have looked upon your country as a cosmopolitan insane
asylum, which naturalizes foreign lunatics for the election of the most
desperate bedlamites to office, that in the confusion of governmental
discord the kleptomaniac democracy may obtain its votive share of the
spoils. Whereas, if the foreign elements had been treated as guest-
patients, until their monomanias had been reduced to a condition for the
legitimate appreciation of sane example, their children’s children, of
the third generation, would have realized the benefits of votive unity.
Or if the ‘pilgrim fathers’ had not been blinded by the fanatical
infatuation which inculcates the doctrine ‘that it is not of ourselves,
but through the intangible labyrinth of redeeming grace that a clue to
salvation is to be obtained for heavenly citizenship,’ they would have
extended to the children of their benefactors the privilege of uniting
with their own in the advantages of a school education. This course
which we have adopted in our colonistic settlements in foreign countries
bespeaks for itself an abiding harmony. However honest the infatuation,
there should be few sympathizers with the exterminating prayer of the
veteran Miles Standish, sighted over the barrel of his musket, in voiced
inflection to the report of powder-sped bullet, in behalf of its victim,
‘May God have mercy on your soul.’ This petition, which he negatived in
act, was raised in reverential gratitude for a home with the privilege
of worshiping God according to the dictates of his own conscience. This
glance, in answer to your question, will enable you to realize the
impossibility of adverse elements abiding in concord together, after
instinctive habits and customs, with their prejudices, have been
confirmed in practice by long usage.”

_Padre._ “If I rightly understand your system of education, it deprives
the children of parental care when most needed? This seems to me like
refined cruelty, approaching barbarism in its tendency. With all your
hopes I think you will find a decided opposition from motherly affection
against its adoption by our race. Besides, it is opposed to sound
doctrine, which urges children to obey parents in all things.”

_Codecio._ “Bethink you of your wet nurses, and the practical usage of
your fashionable mothers, who intrust their infant’s nursery education
to hireling instinct, and you will find your objections answered
conclusively. In addition to the mercenary example of servants, follow
the children of your race to the formulistic teachings of your schools
in which a majority of your female teachers are yet in their teens, with
an experience founded upon precedental rehearsals of the most repulsive
description. Then for the illustration of the sordid inconsistency and
treachery of your people toward their children, visit with your
knowledge the boards of education and you will find ignorance the least
objectionable trait, for they make a mart of their influence with
dealers in school books that in the display of instinctive selfishness
utterly ignores the real advantages of your own system of education. If
you will, in addition, review the incidents of your own infantile
period, you will discover that you was the cause of more anxiety than
comfort to your parents, from the constant rebellion of your instinctive
desires against what you then supposed to be arbitrary restrictions.
Remember this injunction when you visit the Heraclean school; recall all
the events of your past life within the scope of memory that you may be
able to place them in the balance opposed to our method for Heraclean
behoof. But if you do not make an avowal in commendation, as frank in
acknowledgment of the children’s contented affection and the wisdom
shown in their seclusion, as you made of their parent’s worth to Fraile
Gallagato, I shall feel greatly disappointed in my estimate of your
perceptive goodness.”

This allusion of Codecio, to the sacramental night scene passed with
Fraile Gallagato at Amelcoy, suffused the padre’s face with the scarlet
mantle of shame, from which he was relieved when the Dosch petitioned
for his aid in adjusting the tympano-microscopes that had been presented
by the members of the R. H. B. Society to the Dosch and prætor. Upon
trial, when adjusted to the dining tables of the corps and prætor, they
were found to exceed in reflective power the larger field instrument
brought out by M. Hollydorf. The avenues of the instruments, surrounding
the field platform of reflection, were margined on the outer side with a
façade of palatial residences, appearing to the unassisted eye like a
decorated moulding, with cornice beads elaborately carved, while with
microscopic aid each building stood out in bold relief, exhibiting, as a
whole, the grandeur of the architect’s conceptions. The minutiæ was also
clearly exposed, showing an adaptation of intention for convenience and
comfort that plainly declared the superintendence of interested parties.
The convenient adjustment of the interiors, described by the Doschessa,
was a source of unthinking surprise to the padre, until Fabricatus, a
Manatitlan architect, announced that he had been commissioned to
superintend the buildings while in the process of erection, not only
with thought substitution, but actual labor, that in result surprised
the superstitious awe of the German workmen. “The palace of the prince
Dosch,” as it had been labeled in emblazoned advertisement, occupied the
obtuse curve of the centre, midway between the tympano-auricular and
microscopic reflectors. Its resemblance in external configuration to the
ancient kingly palace of San Souci, was immediately recognized by the
members of the corps. The Dosch enjoyed a hearty laugh when he read the
inscription emblazoned on the central shield surmounting the architrave
cornice of the portico. The arms of Prussia were united with an empty
shield, evidently designed for the Manatitlan herald’s record, over
which, and anchoring both, was the banded scroll of hope, with the
legend, “In God we trust,” while underneath was inscribed, Palace of
Prince Dosch of Manatitla.

To M. Hollydorf and Dr. Baāhar it was a source of special annoyance and
chagrin, each urging that it should be erased, notwithstanding the
genealogical curator of sound proved by quotation that it was
legitimately proper and well designed for the expression of ancient
usages. But the Manatitlans begged that it might remain intact, as it
would prove an ungracious act to receive a present so apt and valuable
in aiding personal intercourse between the races, and then mar it
because the donor’s thoughts were prompted by custom to give it a
sounding dedication, in ignorance of the recipient’s peculiarities.

“It matters little,” the Dosch urged, “what formulistic words are used
in the bestowal of a gift, however selfish the insinuation may prove,
when void in the possibility of attainment. But the implied arrogation
bodes ill for the future peace of Europe, in despite of our auramental
warnings, as it indicates a disposition to seek a pretext for the
absorption of northern seaboard, adequate for the commercial
representation of the coveted reputation of the leading continental
power. As with Russia, who feels and understands that her power will be
ranked second or third-rate, with its almost illimitable stretch of
inland empire, without a seaboard with harbors approachable at all
seasons, she covets the possibility of attainment. But as fealty to a
government enjoins the adoption of laws and usages, the nominal bribe of
an empty title will prove hardly sufficient for the encouragement of an
instinctive adoption of a diet of kraut, sausage, lager bier, and
tobacco smoke, as a viaticum of heavenly translation. However, we hope
in reciprocation to bestow upon diplomatic master and pupil an
impression that will induce them to aid in an effort for the kindly
consolidation of a universal government of self legislation, under the
sway of international schools, for the inception of a common language,
and reciprocal interests in preliminary course for the introduction of
our code of education.”

The padre, after the conclusion of his labors, occupied his eyes and
newly aroused inception of thought in watchful meditation upon the scene
in progress, endeavoring to believe the conjoined evidence of his
senses; but, as a test, was trying an exorcising Ave Maria, when Manito
and his choir added to his perplexity by singing the following stanzas:—

             “From the maze of superstitions wild,
             Behold the padre a new born child!
             His thoughts from the body’s bondage free,
             The viper’s fangs will no longer see.

             “When he can without the ‘fathers’ think,
             From the body’s grossness he will shrink.
             Then his thoughts set free with joys supreme,
             Gracious love will be his daily theme.
                 With goodness gracious we give him hail!
                 To immortal joys that never fail.”

The padre could not help joining in the merriment the song provoked,
while his glowing face attested to the aptness of the conception; still
he offered the smiling remonstrance, “According to your own creed, I
should be lacking in honesty if I pretended to believe what I can’t
understand. If the Dosch can explain to me how a man’s soul can be saved
that was lost by transgression, without the efficacy of pardoning grace,
it would please me to learn how it is to be done.”

_Dosch._ “Well, padre, I am afraid Manito’s inspiration was a little
premature. But let us now dispense with mythological themes for those
from which we can truly realize tangible impressions of happiness, as we
are now able to add to conversation facial expression, and, in a limited
degree, exampled effect.”

_Padre._ “Pardon my interruption. I hope that you do not think me
willfully obstinate, for I had much rather you would think me stupid in
perception and weak in determination. I know that habits contracted in
youth rule in age, but aside from my lack of self control, I can
appreciate the fact of the Heracleans’ real happiness, and that it is
derived in source from purity and goodness. Indeed, I have wondered how
they could tolerate me; and can also see the vast improvement made in
the habits of Mr. Welson, Mr. Dow, and the members of the corps. If I
have been beset with doubts, it cannot be strange to your experience. If
I waver again, I hope that you will pity, rather than chide me with
vexation; for I shall try to act honestly, according to my impressions.
It would be presumptuous folly for me to uphold my frailties and
inconstancy against the clear evidence of my perceptions, which cannot
fail to realize the truthfulness of all you advocate in the example of
the Heracleans. It was the transparent purity of your bodies that made
me think that you might represent in translation “the souls of the just
made perfect.””

_Dosch._ “We possibly expected more from your perception than our
experience warranted; but we thought that your natural goodness could be
revived for an appreciation of the success we have obtained with your
companions, that would lead you to think, instead of talking from the
impression of your senses. But the Heraclean parents have concluded to
anticipate the day appointed to visit the schools, and for your
advantage have set apart the morrow for the monthly reunion with their
“boys.””




                             CHAPTER XXIV.


The prætor and his family called at the quarters of the corps shortly
after breakfast on the following morning, to escort the members to the
Adolescentium. Instead of proceeding up the foræ avenue to the temple
gate, the prætor conducted them to the edificos sacerdotium, and from
the court of the centre building led them to an intermural stairway,
that commanded the only means of ascent to the temple walls, which were
higher and distinct from those of the cinctus enclosure. The prætor in
ascending explained that the houses abutting the wall upon the inner and
outer faces, now occupied by the teachers, were designed in building to
facilitate the mysteries of the temple ceremonies. Reaching the parapet
we passed in its walk to a septum wall of an elliptic form, uniting at
its distal extremity from the falls, with, but was in altitude higher
than the cinctus. The outer and inner walls of the lower enclosure
contained an oblong piece of ground of considerable extent. The
interspaces between the walks were planted with fruit trees and vines,
the mist of the falls veiling it from the brink of the precipice. The
priests had undoubtedly availed themselves of these natural aids for the
furtherance of their mysterious impositions; its counterpart of the
northern temple being subject to the same interposed screen, which
closed in the view to all beyond the walls. The undulating upward lift
of the misty veil disclosed the familiar blossoms of the apple, pear,
peach, and apricot, with other exotics of the temperate zones that the
misty atmosphere favored; discovering to us the flavoring source of
preserves which we had attributed to artificial production. The prætor
informed us that the germs of these were of Manatitlan transportation.
The fruitful view on either hand—for the temple garden was also under
kindred cultivation—called forth expressions of admiration.

The prætor, addressing Dr. Baāhar, directed his attention to a pyre in
the centre of the orchard enclosure. “That,” he said, “will answer your
question with reference to the disposal of our dead during the siege;
although it has been long disused for incineration, we still continue
the practice in a less objectionable way. Opposite, at the extreme outer
curve of the wall, you observe turrets rising above the parapet; these
are the vents to ovens or chambers of incineration, and the urns
bordering the garden walks are the family receptacles for the united
ashes of the deceased. Our present method is of Manatitlan devisement,
and it enables us to reduce the bodies to their material ultimatum. The
northern garden is used for the same purpose, the alternation being
dictated by the direction of the wind draught in its waft from the
cinctus enclosure. We were advised by the Manatitlans that your people
practiced inhumation, and supposing that you were prejudiced in favor of
the burial rites of your ancestors, with the padre’s tenacity, we
withheld our method of disposal until your objections had been
anticipated by Manatitlan influence. As you have been impressed with the
body’s corruptibility in diseased materialism, and adjunct
manifestations of instinctive vitality, of voluntary and involuntary
source, you will now regard with horror, akin to our own, the
putrefactive process of decomposition which of necessity imperils the
well-being of the living from the entombment of the dead. How have you
been able to escape the conviction that your practice of inhumation is
cannibalism in a double sense, as you virtually live on the products of
recomposition derived from the decomposition of a dead ancestry, and are
subject to corrupt inoculation from the putrefactive emanations of
decay. The very fact of the festering incorporation of a dead ancestry
with the earth from which you derive sustenance, has conveyed a shock to
our sympathies, in your behalf, that exceeds our powers of expression,
as it is so directly opposed to the current realization of purity. Have
you never thought of the material analogy sustained by the bodies of the
present generation’s reincorporation with the future, in resemblance to
the ancient Egyptian theory of transmigration, which led them to
associate their embalmed relatives with the bodies of reptiles similarly
prepared? The bright array of vessels you see arranged in the colonnades
on either side of the ovens are the body receptacles for incineration,
but they were designed for bath basins, and used by the luxurious old
Heracleans, when they visited the City of the Falls, for recuperation
from the effects of excessive indulgence. Their massive thickness and
primitive design, with the resistant qualities of the metal, has
rendered them proof to wearing attrition through the ages they have been
in use. The Dosch, on your first arrival, cautioned us not to be over
hasty in making known to you the extent of our utensil resources in this
metal, as he said you worshiped it as the god of your salvation, the
largest possessors being esteemed the most godly, without regard to the
means used in obtaining it. But what could we think of the sanity of
your race, when they averred that this god of their worship was the
inciter of envy, hate, and revenge, the ministering demons of murder,
and its tributary types of woe? Still, with your ready appreciation of
our affection, we can scarcely imagine that you were ever ready to
sacrifice honor, honesty, and all the endearing ties of instinct to
possess, as a devotee, its favors for aggregation, in excess of the
requirements enforced by custom, which has made gold an equivalent for
an endurable life with your race.”

_Padre_ (excitedly). “He doesn’t mean to say that they are made of gold?
Why there is enough to make the Jews believe that Heraclea is the New
Jerusalem, and the prætor the promised Messiah!”

_Prætor._ “One would suppose from the padre’s excitement that he had
been a worshiper?”

_Dr. Baāhar._ “A far off worshiper. His sympathy was excited for the
failings of a race who were known in their prime as Hebrews. And it is
recorded in legendary lore, that one of their number, named Judas,
betrayed a person who declared himself to be a son of their god; but
they scoffed, derided, and crucified him. He was the originator of the
sect to which we belonged. But with regard to your process! are you able
to reduce the bones as well as the flesh, without trituration or
chemical aids?”

_Prætor._ “We first eliminate with a slow desiccating heat every
evaporable compound of the body, restoring to the air its contingent
elements in comparative purity. When desiccation is fully accomplished,
the heat is increased for reductive calcination. This stage achieved,
calcareous earth is placed in the niches of the oven for residuum
absorption of its vapor, then the ovens are hermetically closed, until
with the gradual increase of heat complete degradation leaves the
organization of the body in ashen representation; through which can be
traced, in opaque outline, the silvery white of the nerves, and all the
corporate elements, from variation in form and color; but when gathered
for the urn, the whole will scarcely exceed a deunx in weight. The urns,
as you perceive, occupy allotted spaces beneath the trees of the avenue,
without tablets, or chiseled inscription in memorial epitaph.”

_Dr. Baāhar._ “So, so,—certainly your method as a sanitary precaution
recommends itself for universal adoption; while to the doctor of a
sensitive disposition, it would prove a great source of relief, as it
will abolish the useless investigations of the coroner, founded upon the
re-slaughter and ghastly exposure of human remains to the gloating
vision of the horribly curious. Also the undertaker’s advertising
exhibitions, and processional pageantries, alike abhorrent with the
shambles of the coroner from the reek of contagious odor. And last, but
not least, the lying addendas of eulogistic instinct, bestowed in
sermons, prayers, and epitaphs charged with heavenly recommendations for
the unworthy.”

_Mr. Welson._ “Aside from the negatively politic advantages suggested by
the doctor, there is to me something touchingly reverent in mingling the
ashes of the good in a family receptacle, common to all in its memorial
expression; and in safety from the desecration of glacial selfishness in
track of gold, that, ‘for improvement,’ substitutes living tenements for
those of the dead.”

_Padre._ “But not in safety, Mr. Welson, if the urns are of the same
material as the furnace doors and ovens?”

_Mr. Welson._ “You are fearfully right, padre, in your suggestive
amendment, and a substitution must be adopted before your thoughtless
confessional exposure to Fraile Gallagato elicits the prying espionage
of his order. Nay, but you need not color so deeply, for we well know
that in intention you were guiltless of wrong. Nevertheless, you should
learn from your heedless dereliction, that the vagrant tongue of
confession is lost to judgment and discernment of the rights of self,
for you exposed the really good to danger!”

The silence of the padre showed that he sorrowfully acknowledged the
justice of Mr. Welson’s strictures.

Having made the circuit of the oblong enclosure devoted to incineration,
and the orchard cultivation of vine and tree, our party descended into
the school enclosure, the garden of which was planted upon the more
abrupt incline of the temple hill. From thence by an ascending avenue,
we gained an esplanade overlooking the “court of the foræ,” within the
temple gates, where the children were congregated with their parents who
had already arrived. The prætor and Correliana, each holding in
restraint an arm of the impatient mother, whispered their desire that we
should remain silent, that unobserved we might witness the unalloyed
happiness of parents and children.

The eager impatience of the prætor and mother of Correliana, in joyful
manifestation, proclaimed that they, in the protective solace of the
second union, had been blest with sons. Looking through the fissures in
the rudely constructed doors, two youths, one past, and the other
verging upon puberty, were seen standing upon the pedestal plinth of one
of the pillars of the court colonnade, nearest to the gates, with eyes
fixed in expectant gaze upon the closing portals through which had been
admitted the groups of happy parents around whose necks were clasped the
arms of loving children. In their appearance, as they stood motionless
in the trustful support of each other’s arms, watching for the entrance
of their primal source of affection with eager eyes, we discovered their
relationship from the remarkable resemblance they bore in likeness to
Correliana. Although strikingly preëminent in the distinctive halo that
becomes inbred from the hereditary impression of matured judgment in
parental bequeathment, they did not greatly excel their companions in
personal beauty. Tall and graceful, they possessed in common with their
companions complexions of clear transparency, which disclosed the
movements of expression under emotional control, in freedom from speck
or taint. As the portals closed their eyes questioned each other with a
shadow of curious inquiry, not in doubt or anxiety, for the welfare of
their parents, but for the cause of their unwonted delay. Without being
heedless or lacking in sympathy for the happiness of their associates,
or unmindful of the cheering salutations of parents and children, it was
easy to trace in their faces emotional changes akin to sorrowful
disappointment. To restrain the mother’s yearning longer was impossible;
pushing wide apart the inner gates she stood revealed, uttering the
call, “Plautus—Adestus!” But affection in premonition had beckoned their
eyes to the source before the words reached them, and the eager parents
had hardly overstepped the threshold ere they were clasped in their
arms. The consummation of this greeting gave a freer flow to the general
expression of joy; the scholars, old and young, soon clustered around
us, eager to become known and recognized in the current reciprocation of
affection by name, bestowing in love such endearments, that for the
moment, with sadness, our own youthful impressions, barren of their
cheer, reappeared in contrasted desolation. But translated back to the
reality, by the warmth of glowing sympathy, with its unspeakable thrill
of tender emotions, the void of our past lives was relieved of its
selfish regrets. The teachers we had frequently met, and had found in
them such worth garnered with experience in the practical dispensation
of exampled goodness, that our nearest of kin stood afar off in
comparison with the reverent warmth of affection that these guardian
exemplars of youth attracted with the genial current of their sympathy.
Well did I interpret from my own impressions the retrospective thoughts
that brought frequent flushes to the faces of my companions when the
mirrored past was contrasted with the present.

After an hour spent in sweet communion with their parents, the children
were summoned by their teachers to guide us through the school
departments. The culinary dependencies were first visited; in these the
morning’s quota of children were engaged in the preparation of food for
our entertainment, with such cleanly decorum that our appetites were
revived in expectation. In the “workshops” and garden detachments
exhibited the useful combinations of labor, exercise, and amusement,
which practiced in communion, gave a sportive air of cleanliness to
their employments. During the infantile period, educational impression
was intrusted to the nurses, who while inculcating lessons of self-
control over the appetites and passions, attracted the affections above
the cravings of instinctive animality. Their assurance that goodness was
intuitive with the Heraclean children was fully sustained, for in their
intercourse they were altogether free from the petulant exactions of
selfishness. The teachers informed us that the Kyronese children, on
their first introduction, felt the loss of parental association, but
were soon weaned by the loving attention of censors and nurses, whose
experience enables them to attract, while increasing in strength the
ties of parental affection. After the first monthly visit of their
parents they became not only reconciled to their association, but
emulous of gaining the loving influence that relieved the Heraclean
children from petulance and selfishness. This appeared to us strange, as
they resembled the children of our own race, whose instinctive
selfishness is ever on the reach for more, from its first dawn to the
dim vision and palsied mumblings of extreme age. But in explanation, the
teachers said, that during the first days, their cravings could only be
satisfied by advancing a peremptory claim to everything they saw in the
possession of the Heraclean children; who were amused in supplying their
insatiable wants, and wonderingly curious in observing the effect
produced by their accumulations. When all the material resources of the
Heraclean children had been exhausted, the Kyronese were scarcely able
to move in their dormitories, which were nearly filled with the
miscellaneous collections that had been contributed for the
gratification of their miserly dispositions.

“Our own, as well as the donor’s curiosity was on the tiptoe of
expectation, to learn the next phase in this unexampled manifestation of
greediness. For a time, after they found that every portable article of
their entertainers had been transferred to their possession, they
employed their senses in handling, arranging, and nibbling, until tired,
satiated, and nauseated with the changes and selfish gratification of
taste. Then they began to look about for some new source of instinctive
pleasure; a view of each other’s treasures soon begot a covetous desire
for counter possession; this led to exchanges, and haggling endeavors to
overreach each other with infantile chicanery; this practice soon led to
squabbles that required our interference, which in turn rendered the
trading art unpopular. Next, in course, they commenced purloining, and
when the loss was discovered they used disparaging invectives which led
to a trial of strength for the recovery of lost articles. They next
proceeded to fortification, and constant guard, with occasional sallies
for reprisal, the skirmishing calling for our arbitration, and
restoration of the articles in dispute to the original owner, caused
this method of appropriation to be discontinued, at least in non-edible
articles, that could not be disposed of by the mouth. But at night their
accumulations of eatables were subject to each other’s encroachments,
and from over eating, to prevent robbery and discovery, they made
themselves sick, which called for the censor to enact the part of
doctor, with such success that food in excess of their wants became
decidedly distasteful. This diversion produced a thoughtful stay of
their selfish propensities, which in train caused them to look upon
their accumulations as incumbrances, and at first a somewhat reluctant
restoration of the least coveted articles to Heraclean proprietorship.
But as the kindly impression of goodness in bestowal began to expand,
the petals of affection opened for the full clearance of vagrant
covetousness. The grateful impressions of reciprocation soon brought
into play, with the elder, their hereditary mechanical resources, which
have since proved to them a revenue source of gladness. Of course we
aided in the advancement of the selfish fermentation for the removal of
the lees in the remedial process of clarification, and reaction of
covetousness for the exemplification of its effects to the Heraclean
children, to whom its impressions were new.”

The padre’s smiling face, already known to the Kyronese children, soon
ingratiated him as a particular favorite with the Heracleans, and in
their charge he soon disappeared, and was afterwards found in the
workshop demonstrating the advantage of paneling for strengthening and
rendering doors less cumbersome, the parents of the children regarding
his handywork with curious admiration. In the neighborhood of twenty
acres of land on the southern slope of the hill enclosure were
cultivated by the children as a garden and orchard, as well as for the
field growth of cereals, with an emulous desire for parental
commendation. The distinctions in size being mainly dependent upon age,
the Manatitlan gradations were of course impracticable, but the smaller
children were constantly under the supervision of their nurses and
censors, although not from necessity, as there was an affectionate
disposition on the part of the elder and larger boys to offer their
backs as steps, and hands as aids to assist the young and weak whenever
an opportunity offered. Indeed, the effect of their example, after a few
weeks of arbitrary sway, effectually cured the Kyronese children of
their fagging dispositions.

Having witnessed the children’s proficiency in a variety of useful
pastimes, we were invited to visit the culinary department a second
time, to see the food in its prepared state ready to be served. The
prætor observing our admiring surprise at the ease with which the
various manipulations had been accomplished, without bewraying with dust
and adhesive mixtures the persons and clothing of the youthful
principals and aids, said that each, with intuitive perception, felt
that purity within themselves was necessary for the sanction of
confidence in associate reciprocation. To be not only cleanly, but pure,
without a questioning thought of subterfuge, was clearly the motor
influence of every enactment, with the special desire that their
personalities should reflect the refinements of reality. “In all the
departments the children are taught by example, that their personal
individuality may become responsible to itself for acceptable purity to
others in current association; so that in health all their wants of
instinct are self supplied, although rendered facile by household
coöperation, without unnatural exactions that would beget impressions of
mentality. From these exercises of self dependence, the spirit of
emulation has proved an incentive to invention.

“So you will perceive, that instead of the classical renderings of
murder and its congeneric inhumanities, which the Dosch informs me
obtains the highest grade of your collegiate honors, our accomplishments
and refinements all aim to an increase in affectionate purity, and
confidence in association, for real perfection in living assurance of
immortality. He also informs me, that this evidence of maturity in
judgment would be looked upon with superstitious awe, as of supernal
agency, indicating a moribund state of precocity, while with the
Manatitlans and Heracleans it is esteemed as a necessary manifestation
for the fulfillment of Creative indications. But withal, it has been
hard for us to conceive how you have been able to avoid the impression
of the absolute cause and tendency of your misery; with the extremes of
want and superfluity in your midst, it should have warned your people
that they were receding from happiness. In like manner we are puzzled to
conceive upon what they found their present and future hopes of
happiness, when they are constantly at variance with their own kind.”

We were spared the full sum of his wondering inquiries, by Plauto and
Adestus, who came to announce the hour of refection. In mustering, the
padre and Dr. Baāhar were missing. The padre was found surrounded by the
children and their parents in the workshop, having just completed a
drawing shave, from a copper alloyed pruning knife, he was in ecstasies
from the keenness and permanency of its edge. Looking up, in questioning
appeal, to learn the nature of its alloy, his eyes met the prætor’s, who
answered that all their cutting instruments and tools were made from old
Heraclean swords, spears, and other warlike arms. “But of the metals
entering into their composition I cannot inform you, as all the
armorer’s records were destroyed in the sack of the old city; but I am
pleased if you have found them serviceable.”

“Serviceable!” exclaimed the padre, with astonished admiration, “why,
man alive, if it will hold the edge and work like this, you can make
your city the richest in the world, according to its size, by patenting
the combination, and live like princes upon the royalty!”

“If it will prove serviceable in advancing the peaceful prosperity of
the world, I will endeavor to learn the character of the metals and
method of composition,” answered the prætor; “but in the mean time lay
aside your implements, and join with us in partaking of the refection
prepared by the children.”

Joining in the search for Dr. Baāhar, he was discovered in a natural
grotto, engaged in sketching in outline a statue garlanded with fresh
vines. When aroused from his penciling meditations, by Correliana, he
accosted her archly in the apostrophic style. “Ah, ha! so, so, Mistress
Correliana, I have caught you at last? I see that your young gentlemen
still pay their garlanded respects to Sieba the Vendic goddess of love!
Moreover, in the future I shall claim a sort of cousinship with you, for
your Roman ancestors in borrowing the Arconan goddess of Rugen isle to
associate with their Venus, accepted a German as well as a Slavonian
deity. But where are the associate representatives of your borrowed
Nemisa—Flyntz, Zernbog, Iphabog, and others of the fraternal
godhead—which should be in company? I hope, for relation’s sake, your
people have not enacted the part of iconoclastics? for they were wont to
hold near association in Vendic mythology.”

The doctor’s illusive antiquarian nest was here robbed of its cuckold
eggs by a laughing exclamation of the mayorong, who in apologizing
explained, that the supposed garlands were vine disguised Kyronese
mousetraps, which were woven with leaves and flowers to prevent
detection from the instinctive caution of the little rodentian
marauders. This revelation collapsed the doctor’s enthusiasm for his
discovery, which he supposed to be a sure indication of the Heraclean’s
surreptitious worship of Pagan deities. Upon questioning the lad who had
fabricated them, he stated that they were made to capture the
destructive pirates of the banana patch, and that he had selected the
head of the grotto image to keep the leaves and flowers fresh until
night.

His denouement was a bonne bouche for the padre, who was in feudal
arrears with his Irish bulls begot from hybrid mythology. His mirthful
thrusts caused in the doctor’s mood a show of testiness, until
Correliana reminded the exultant padre that it was hardly generous to
pursue his advantage before strangers. With all his reverence and
submissive obedience to her will, he sottoriously muttered in thought,
“Does he think that a turban will make a turk, or a wreath upon an image
declare it to be an object of worship?” The mirthful flashes of the
padre’s eyes from beneath the wreath of Kyronese and Heraclean children
surmounting his shoulders, with the frequent checks he placed upon his
tongue, enhanced the humorous infection, to the evident discomfiture of
his snuborian foe. Naturally endowed with the elements of strong
affection, his habits had stimulated misplaced confidence, which had
placed him at the beck of imposition and negotiable friendships. Of
genial warmth, when the object was present, but with absence, his
remembrance would relapse into hibernating torpidity. These superficial
traits had subjected him to impositions without lessening his
susceptibility to repetition. The Dosch had recommended Correliana and
the prætor to observe his peculiarities closely, as from his superficial
range of impressions they would obtain an idea of the leading traits of
representative democracy, peculiar to the civilized races. Although in
the manifestations of innate goodness he was not only an exception to
the majority, but a rarity with the minority, still the evanescent
durability of his affectionate impressions, depending upon the
superficial current of precedental routine, that delights in the
sensational excitement of the senses, was a typical reflection of the
masses. “You will find a majority of those who patronize the legendary
motto, ‘What shall I do to be saved,’ like the padre’s original self,
when first encountered by Correliana. With a quid of tobacco in their
mouths, and a pipe projecting therefrom, and a glass of demonizing
spirits in their right hands, while from the effect produced ‘they cry
out in the anguish of spirit, What shall I do to be saved from the wrath
to come?’”

The refection was dispensed by the children in the garden colonnade, who
waited upon the requirements of their parents and guests with such
joyful alacrity that affectionate reciprocation reduced the limits of
food to an availing necessity, which caused the padre to exclaim with
impulsive fervor, “I wish to goodness gracious Jimmy and all the rest
were here!”

The day was far advanced, when the chief censor, in behalf of the
children, expressed their gratitude to the members of the corps for
their deliverance from the inveteracy of savage hatred. Then as a
closing memento, Correliana read the nuptial record of the few that were
about to graduate, that the members of the corps might hold the traits
in memory for personal comparison and selection of candidates in their
next day’s visit to the female school. At our departure, after evening
song, in which it was the children’s special delight to join with their
parents, we were made sensible of a grateful share in their affectionate
memories; but the padre’s kindlier, yet vagrant disposition, had been
discovered beneath its artificial mask of entailed habit, so at parting
he attracted the warmer flow of their sympathies which suffused his eyes
with kindly moisture. When he was finally permitted to overstep the foræ
threshold of the temple portals, he exclaimed with glistening eyes, “My
conscience sake alive, I feel as if every soul of those boys had passed
through me with gladness; and I can truly and thankfully say, that I
feel in the purity of their loving goodness as if they had offered me
the only object worth living for. What joy there would be, if our
Sundays could be spent in communion with parents and children free from
the alloy of selfishness?” The earnestness of the padre’s implied
petition met with a hearty response from all.




                              CHAPTER XXV.


On their way from the temple school, Correliana invited the padre and
members of the corps to pay a twilight visit to her garden. Passing
through her father’s into her own garden, while yet the upward slant of
the sun’s rays reached above the Andean peaks, the party were surprised
and startled by the winged hoverings of a cloud of birds of every
feather, accompanied with the vocal salutation,—“Well, my goodness
gracious, if here ain’t the padre! well, I declare, aha,
aha!”—pronounced in variations of tone peculiar to the raven, starling,
and parrot. With a confused fluttering, twittering, and tonguester terms
of speech, they with encouraged familiarity, alighted wherever a perch
was offered. Correliana tried to still their clamors by calling upon the
leaders, but only effected a change, all uniting in the word “Musick!”
To stay their noisy importunities she beckoned her visitors to be
seated, and then under the escort of her feathered choristers she
brought forth an instrument of music which Captain Greenwood had
presented to her as a parting gift. On opening the case she presented
the instrument to the curators of sound, who were known to be excellent
pianists. From its resemblance to an accordion they started back with
horror, without touching it, which caused the beaming face of Correliana
to become overshadowed with disappointment. But the humorous smiles of
the others relieved her from sudden apprehension, by suggesting, as the
cause of their dismay, some foregone amusing event. In explanation, M.
Hollydorf described the mechanical affinity of the accordion with the
primitive bagpipes, which to the modern musician were a nightmare
revelation of the past ages of discord. “Except in its improved capacity
of breathing sweet harmony in the hands of an experienced musician, the
accordion has the same monotonous drone of its ancestral relative. The
source of Signor Pettynose and Herr Lindenhoff’s chagrin had its origin
on our voyage hitherward from the annoyance caused by one in the hands
of the _Tortuga’s_ cook, which they purchased and threw overboard, and
its ghostly resuscitation in your hands has given rise to their
expressions of horror. I perceive that the instrument in your hands only
bears an outward resemblance to the accordion, and the moment its tones
are revealed, I am sure my impressions will be sustained, and the
artists will be more enthusiastically retentive in its praise, than they
have been in pantomimic rejection.”

While M. Hollydorf was soothing the wounded enthusiasm of Correliana’s
affection, the instinctively sensitive curators passed the case, with
its instrument, from one to the other, with an expression, kindred in
acting translation, to the effect likely to be produced upon two
civilized or savage bachelors in the armed disposal of an infant which
had been subjected to their inspection, for commendation, by a fond
mother. Finding that their former criticisms of Heraclean music had
placed them in a dilemma that required vindication, they questioned each
other’s ability for extrication. Pettynose having used an accordion in
boyhood as a dernier Alma Mater for the nursing of his musical
faculties, offered in acknowledgment of his debt of gratitude, with
manifest reluctance, the tribute of his experience in expiation of his
long neglect and indifference to the rudimentary ties of affection. With
the first out-breathings of the foundling, as his fingers deftly
caressed with familiar touch the well known features, he became
conscious that the ties of relationship had been rendered harmonious by
a foreign marriage. Reassured by this discovery the petulant asperities
of his face vanished; then after a short wandering prelude for
thoughtful familiarization, he lapsed into a musical reverie of the
past, that gradually caused his disembodiment from the petty assumptions
of instinct, leaving his natural spirit of goodness to soar in flight
upon the wings of sympathy. In a few moments he became lost to material
impressions, other than from the imposed invocation of his fingers,
causing the colonnades and courts to become tremulous with the lulling
concord of sweet sounds. Correliana with hands reverentially folded over
her breast leaned against a vine-wreathed pillar, regarding his face and
fingers with her large luminous eyes overshadowed with a misty veil of
thoughtful inspiration, as if in search for the mazy source of the
mysterious influence that held her entranced within the spell of
inwrought concord. But the motor spirit of memory in reviving vision
bore upon its talismanic wings the artist far away from self to roam
among scenes bright with the revels of childhood in the land of his
birth, on the banks of the swift flowing Amaril, whose cascades
embowered by the tropical hill groves of Brazil had inspired with the
rippling flow of their echoes his love for music. The reveried air of
“Home, sweet home” surprised his listeners with a responsive echo, that
held them immovable in hushed silence, with a controlling power that
banished self. Even the harsh discordant screams of the parrots, calling
for the vesper notice of their mistress, were hushed, as if suddenly
made aware of their voiced defects; while birds with voices attuned to
song in cadenced time swayed silently listening upon their sprayed
perches, eying askance as if in search of the new songster from whom the
sweet notes came. As minutes unheeded winged their way into the current
of the past, and the night shades of twilight deepened, stronger grew
the charmed bondage that held Correliana and her mother dumb and
motionless, bound by the sweet chords of melodious inspiration. But
alas, as if to typify the ephemeral pleasures of sense, the spell was
rudely broken by the grosser instinctive impressions of the unfortunate
padre, who recalled the wandering spirit of Pettynose, by asking, “Can’t
you play Yankee Doodle, Jim Crow, God Save the Queen, or something we
know?”

The reader has undoubtedly felt the chill of sudden obscurity when the
mellow light of a declining summer sun had been intercepted by a thunder
gust, and the startling effect produced by the lightning’s dazzling
gleam that makes murky darkness palpable after its transient blaze. This
gleam the aroused Pettynose darted on the padre, as he thundered with
quavering voice: “You soulless son of a paddy! are you so dead to the
divine influence of harmony that you could not feel that I was moved by
an inspiration beyond the reach of the time-serving twaddle of national
humbuggery and the idol worship of sectarian selfishness?”

As the rumbling growl of the enraged musician ceased, the soft
expression of Correliana’s face was for a moment lighted with an
expression of reproach directed to the reproved and reprover. The padre,
whose lack of thoughtful impression had invoked this outburst, turned
with flushing winces from face to face, questioning the source of his
error, but only met frowns of pitying, or disdainful reproof, which
prudently inclined him to silence. Pettynose, restored to his
instinctive self, examined the instrument to discover the attachment
that had contributed by its aid for the production of sounds of such
pure accord, in freedom from the drone of its prototype. Sliding back
the key-board his vision was introduced to a novel mechanism, bearing
but a slight resemblance to that of the accordion, except in formulistic
fabrication. In the place of a reed-board of wood it had one of glass.
Covering the openings were reeds of bamboo answering to the stops of the
keys. Raising the plate he discovered on its under side longitudinal
fossæ corresponding in length and form with the string attachments of
the harp, which it represented in miniature; over this the peculiar
strings were strung. The wind in passing from the bellow’s font through
the open slots caused an æolian vibration, which was increased in volume
and sweetness of sound by the vibrating accord of the reeds. The spirits
of the two curators of sound were highly elated by the discovery of this
rare musical waif; at the same time were surprised to learn that it had
been the companion of their river voyage; but readily accounted for its
concealment with the supposition that Captain Greenwood withheld it from
the idea that it was to them an object of aversion. Pettynose, when
leaving, would, in his heedless selfishness, have taken the instrument
with him, but M. Hollydorf, anticipating Correliana’s anxiety, bade him
recollect that it was a gage of affection.

When the music ceased, a raven and parrot, who had perched upon the
padre’s broad-brimmed hat, commenced a gossiping promenade, backwards
and forwards upon the diametric extremes of its circumference,
alternating the rise and descent of its rim from his nose to the back of
his coat-collar, to his great annoyance, which added to the comical
effect. But the padre continued silent, notwithstanding the birds’
quotations of his familiar phrases, “Well, I declare! my conscience’
sake!” and the like, which seemed to be prompted by the changes wrought
in the position of his hat. At length Correliana became mindful of their
annoyance, and despatched them to their roosts; then she apologized to
the padre for the liberty she had taken, by saying, that they had
imitated her when she was repeating his phrases to familiarize her ear
with the intonations of the English language. “But I am not alone
accountable,” she said, “for that demure personage,” pointing to the
prætor, “has largely contributed by his patience and perseverance to
their proficiency. The Doschessa wishes to have me remind you that their
imitations are an apt example of ritual observances, classical
educations, and fashionable accomplishments, which are styled the
progressive features of Giga civilization.”

“It pleases me to hear you try to make the padre understand the
difference between a practical education and one of words,”
patronizingly added Dr. Baāhar.

This assumption of the doctor’s dispersed the depressing cloud that
weighed upon the padre’s spirits, who replied, “Ah doctor, you forget
that to-day you were unable to make the material distinction between an
ancient goddess of your fathers, and a Heraclean statue crowned with
Kyronese mousetraps, even with the advantage of your wordy education?”

Mr. Welson laughingly commended Correliana and the prætor for their
successful essay in the professorial art, offering to recommend their
talents to the Dominican College of Guatemala, or its Jesuitical
propagandic rival institution of Chinandagua of Nicaragua, which were
devoted to the education of parrots for the dissemination of their
tenets among the people, if disposed to enlarge their sphere of
usefulness. Declining, in the same vein, his intercession in their
behalf, the members of the corps were invited to join the family of the
prætor at the table, where they could have the advantage of seeing and
hearing the Manatitlans, as the Dosch was desirous of joining in the
conversation. The voice of Correliana aroused chirping murmurs from the
leafy coverts of tree and bush, but with such drowsy pipes of
recognition it was easy to discover that the notes were muffled in the
head’s feathery couch beneath the wings. When seated, the Dosch
addressed the padre as follows, “Your race claim that the chief object
of their lives is to obtain present and future happiness; now I would
like to ask you whether your ‘system of education,’ founded upon the
parotic rehearsal of progenitorial self-inflicted woes, has any tendency
for the fulfillment of their hopes? Then answer, with thoughtful
consideration drawn from your day’s experience, whether you have ever
approached so near the shrine of an enjoyment, so pure and
unadulterated, in joyful impression, as that of to-day?”

_Padrex._ “I declare to gracious, never!”

_Dosch._ “But would you not relapse at the sight of a priest, as the
converted Jew did at the chink of the shekels?”

_Padre._ (Scratching his head.) “Well, you know it’s a hard thing for
one to abjure his religion, altogether?”

_Dr. Baāhar._ (Testily.) “He’s doomed to blind martyrdom in defense of
his idols!”

_Padre._ “But I know those that belong to my own creed, and am not
willing to be caught with mousetraps! Besides, when we were together on
board of the _Tortuga_, after our good luck, I asked you to advise me
about the education of my children; and you replied, ‘Let them glean all
the knowledge they can from the schools of their country, until they
arrive at the age of twenty; then send them to Germany, and they will
then be able to appreciate the rudimentary principles of our
philosophical course of study, if they are well posted in physical
gymnastics and sword exercise.’ Of course the Manatitlans are well
acquainted with the gigantic self-esteem of the French ideas of
education, which is expressed in the proverb, ‘Live in Paris a year, and
then die, content.’”

_Dosch._ “The philosophical self-complacency of the Germans with regard
to the benefits of what they are pleased to style their system of
education, is dependant upon habit rather than merit, even in the scale
of civilized estimation. But when reduced from its superflage to
reality, the course of study pursued in a German university, of
sufficient celebrity to attract foreign students, commences with the
majority,—from the boasting authority of their own statements,—by a test
of the body’s capacity to hold beer, saur-kraut, and sausage, seasoned
with tobacco smoke, for the encouragement of philosophical ruminations.
When the freshman devotee’s body has become adequately distended, ethics
and the art of disputatious war are inaugurated, with the premeditated
intention of testing antagonistic skill in the gentle art of tattooing.
Although lacking in the graceful designs of the more primitive races,
the facial carvings in these friendly encounters indicate a nosological
taste for depiction, characterized with boldness of touch on the part of
the successful aspirant for honors. After having had his passions slaked
by sword indenture indemnification, for the aggravations of guttural
opprobriums, swilled at the collateral troughs of learning, the
candidate for high collegiate honors, with his initiatory degree
tattooed in autographic commendation of his skillful attainments, enters
upon his second term. This completed, his body has become seasoned to
saturation with the constituent elements of lager bier, schnapps, saur-
kraut, pickled herring, sausage, and like condimental retainers, which
are incorporated with tobacco-smoke in preparation for the study of the
Oriental languages. At the expiration of three or more years employed in
hard smoking, drinking,—or lageration, as it is classically termed,—with
concomitant study, and wrangling, he reaches the acme of Teutonic
elaboration; becoming to all intents and purposes as useless a casket of
automatical movements and articulate sounds, as the feathered
theologians educated in the Jesuit and Dominican Colleges of Chinandagua
and Guatemala. His sympathetic impressibility can be truly likened to
the saw of the surgical sawyer, in feeling for the suffering it imparts
to the integuments and bone in separation. The French proverb, which you
quoted, is certainly apt. For those who have engaged in the follies of
Paris for a year, of self accord, we have found so utterly absorbed in
the vanities of selfish gratification, that even the legendary memory of
an instinctive soul has been lost, as well as all thoughts of purity and
goodness in devisement for reciprocation. The real fact must now be
apparent to your impressions, that the generations of your race have
turned their backs to the realities of the future,—which could be
secured for those that are to succeed them,—in pursuit of the will o’
wisp phantoms of the past. To-morrow, you will be able to realize how we
preserve and improve the germs of purity and goodness for transmission,
in freedom from the frivolous vanities of sense. In parting for the
night all united in expressing their appreciation of the Dosch’s
truthful portrayal.”




                             CHAPTER XXVI.


When the family of the prætor called in the morning to escort us to the
scholia puellulitas, Correliana received the attentions of M. Hollydorf
with marked pleasure; indeed, the happiness of the prætor and her mother
was so joyfully exultant, that it attracted the attention of the
Kyronese as well as our own. The temple on the north, occupying the
esplanade of the second foræ, was the counterpart of the southern in
architectural design. But its site was more commanding, embracing in the
view obtained from the parapet walk, the latifundium, the grove of the
temple beyond the cinctus gate, and the river expanse in the Bœotian
vale below. On the south the terraced road could be traced in its upward
windings to the brink of the basaltic cliff. To the north the view was
in like manner circumscribed by the precipice and its outjutting flank
of wooded hills. Within the enclosure of the temple walls the hill-slope
to the north was more abrupt and shaded, and from its cooler temperature
it was better adapted for the culture of fruitful shrubs and trees. The
weissich of the falling water, and ring of the basaltic cubes, was much
more distinctly impressed in their ever varying intonations, rendering
hearing upon the parapet difficult, while in the colonnades of the
eastern courts of the enclosure conversation became irksome and
wearying. These effects were produced by the larger concavity in the
southern face, by an inclination given to the main body of the water,
from a northern curve in the direction of the river current above; a
jutting columnar screen, without the falling water, formed a
reverberating chamber that reflected the sound northward. Mr. Welson,
remarking the effort required for speaking and hearing, asked the prætor
the reason of the founder’s preferring the shady courts of the northern
temple, for the tender female plants, with its greater disadvantages
from the louder sound of the falls, when the warm mellow rays of the
southern were so much better adapted for the development of the motherly
germ of affection?

Before answering, the prætor turned his eyes upon the questioner with a
quizzical glance, then replied,—“What you have observed is, from present
appearances, true, and we learned that the prætor Indegatus made the
selection in accordance with the judgment your discernment has
expressed. But, in referring the reasons of his choice to the Dosch
Giganteo, he reversed his decision, sustaining his judgment by urging
the special adaptation of the supposed objections for counteracting the
then prevalent disposition of the Heraclean women for invidious gossip,
and their initiation into a staid, thoughtful mood, necessary for
overcoming their hereditary inclinations for tongue talk. As I perceive
that the question of Mr. Welson echoes your common curiosity to learn
the influence of the choice, I will notice some of the effects in their
course of development. Yesterday you remarked, while upon the temple
walls of the boys’ enclosure, that the whirr of the falling water
scarcely interfered with conversation, after you became accustomed to
its counter resonance upon your voices, while here we are obliged to
seek the screen of a turret, and then speak and hear with difficulty;
not so much from the overwhelming loudness, as the confused blending of
sound, that renders articulate modulation tiresome. Although partially
overcome when the ear becomes accustomed to the impression, still the
monotonous replication of variations in kind, without order in sequence,
is too close, as the Dosch informs me, in its resemblance to the
unmeaning plash of words, to distinguish in utterance those void of
affectionate sympathy. This toning influence imposes a thoughtful
silence upon those inclined to speak in freedom from the sympathetic
direction of thought devisement, encouraging a mood for the study of
individuality. The Dosch advises me that a prattling novice, from your
race, would soon discover that expressionless words became involved in
the wish-a-washy plash and whirr of the falling waters; and with
repetition would feel the reflection, in burlesque effect, for the
enlightenment of her understanding, when fully sensible of the vague
implication, and of necessity would be obliged to limit her speech to
the honest expression of affectionate emotions. This, he says, has
rendered the cataracts of your country unpopular with your fashionable
ladies, after the sight-seeing impression has been gratified; still
springs being preferred as a place of fashionable sojourn, as they
neither confuse or rival in noisy revel their tongues. In proof of what
I wish to convey to your understanding, you will perceive that upon
useful subjects of enlightenment, the Manatitlan voice is readily heard
by our accustomed ears. But when I pronounce fashionable dress, society,
public opinion, theatre, and like synonyms of multitudinous expression,
the sound becomes confused with the noisy repetitions of the water,
requiring labored and labiate vocalization to make you comprehend their
import. Indeed, I perceive that your ears are at as great a loss to
recognize the familiar words, as I am to judge of their meaning from the
mimicry of sound. But how quickly your perceptive attention is attracted
by the sympathetic tones of my voice when attuned in approximation to an
affectionate wish! Our scholastic ninietas never turn a deaf ear, or a
void eye from an expression in word or emotion prompted by kindly
affection, during the heaviest roar of the winter’s flood. But folly
invested with the blatant mechanism of Demosthenic oratory, or the
rhyming jointure of poetical numbers, could not be distinguished in the
faintest weish of a season of drouth. You will perceive from these hints
that the elements favored the choice of Giganteo; and will now be able
to test the wisdom of the preference that subjected our females to the
restraining influence of this water power, so effectual for the
suppression of a voiceful tongue, hollow in the resonant expression of
truthful sincerity. We have been informed by Manatitlan auramentors,
that your women are almost universally afflicted with a gabbling
epidemic of the tongue, beyond which, and the ear, the impression of
their utterances rarely reaches; and we are truly glad that you have an
abundant supply of large waterfalls provided as successful aids for the
inauguration of a thoughtfully silent era. The shades of the northern
colonnades and courts have, by the reflection of this wise choice, been
made luminous with the rays of affectionate goodness, for woman’s
sympathy in its purity and brightness can illumine the darkest night
with enduring warmth proof to the vicissitudes of time and place.”

_Dr. Baāhar._ “Since the days of Archimedes there has certainly never
been a hydrostatic invention for the practical use of water, that can
compare with the beneficial result you proclaim.”

_Prætor._ “The Dosch desires me to give you the assurance that the
hydraulic power of the cataract has been so well tested for tempering in
infancy and youth a tendency to volubility, that with the least
inclination to fanatical superstition, the globular form of the earth
might be esteemed the result of providential intention designed for the
regulation of woman’s tongue, as it necessitates the waterfall in the
flow of rivers.”

This humorous interpretation of design excited a smile; but Correliana
assured the members of the corps, that the effect produced by the sound
of the waterfall had been but little exaggerated, inasmuch as it
directly induced a thoughtful mood, and disinclination to speak. After a
moment’s thoughtful silence, she asked her father if the selection had
in reality been made with the provised intention of inducting thought by
interrupting speech; and if the women of Heraclea had at any anterior
date given cause for the constant reproof of falling water, to chide
them for the heedless use of the tongue? To which question the father
replied, “You must recollect, Correliana, that many centuries have
passed since the temples were dedicated to educational direction. Then,
as you are aware, Indegatus had been subjected to traitorous annoyances,
from which the Manatitlan Dosch of the period relieved him, enabling him
to cope successfully with disaffection which had been fanned by woman’s
tongue. The Dosch also desires me to remind you of the lessons you have
been taught of the commune degradation of civilized women in Giga
countries.”

_Padre._ “I have often heard of hydropathic treatment of scolding and
gadding women, but this is certainly a great improvement, as it obviates
by anticipation the ducking-stool.”

Descending from the temple walls into the garden court, the necks of
Correliana and her mother were suddenly enclosed in the arms of a
surpassingly beautiful form, whose face was concealed by a profusion of
golden hair, which floated in glancing sheen, like the floss of the
silk-tree, over the heads of the united three, closing from view the
caresses, which seemed to impart to the atmosphere a reciprocal flow of
pervading affection, causing each member of the corps to stand
transfixed with emotions transcending by far the highest attainments of
admiration. M. Hollydorf stood like a statue fully enravished from self,
for he alone had caught a glimpse of the sunbeam’s features, as its rays
darted from their concealment, animated with a glow of gladness, that
had been lying in wait for a joyful surprise. Bewildered with amazement,
he was seemingly lost to his personal identity, for he remained heedless
and motionless, until recalled by the prætor’s salutation. “Luocuratia,
my evoce, you must not forget the presence of our deliverers. This is M.
Hollydorf, of whom your mother and sister have so often spoken.” Then
leaving M. Hollydorf, with herself absorbed, he proceeded to introduce
the other members of the corps, individually, the names of each
Luocuratia pronounced mechanically, in repetition, without even the
accompaniment of a furtive glance in diversion from the object of her
first attraction. With her arms still encircling the neck of her mother
and sister, she looked out from the veil of her hair, regarding M.
Hollydorf with changing flushes of perplexed emotion coursing beneath
her transparent skin, like borealian flashes beaming in a moonlit sky.
Mr. Welson, whose quick perception had caught the source of the spell’s
inspiration took the prætor’s arm, and then beckoning his companions,
they joined the happy parents, who added to the fullness of their joy by
introducing the members of the corps to their daughters. After enjoying
the mutual flow of unbounded affection between parents and children, for
a short time, as the centre of attraction, the prætor conducted them
through the gate alcove of the garden screen, to an acacia hedge,
through the interstices of which they could observe, undetected, the
scenes of affectionate endearment, in animated, but silent flow, passing
in the conscious enactment of thoughtful impression, between the
clustering family groups.

At the conclusion of a pæan song of thanksgiving, they engaged in
various pastimes, improvised from the joyous promptings of the occasion,
in which both old and young participated. All their movements were so
replete with the affectionate expression of gleesome mirth, song, and
frolic wit, the paucity of lingual accompaniments was scarcely noticed.
The impression of our own feelings, in unison, the padre recognized, who
declared, upon his conscience, that he felt a brighter glow of conscious
affection than words could convey, imparted from their silent expression
of joyous reciprocation. He soon became so wrought with the intensity of
affectionate participation, that he could not resist the attraction, but
darted from ambush, exclaiming, “Upon my soul, I know that I shall be
like a bull in a china shop, but I must be with them,” and was soon in
their midst, with face aglow from smiling excitement. The young Kyronese
maidens, from toddling infancy to seven,—the first stage in the course
of instinctive life,—soon took possession of the padre by the right of
preëmption, holding him captive from its conferred privileges of
priority in discovery; but permitted the Heraclean parents and children
to participate in their joy, although holding him as a special bondsman
to their arbitrary sway. Detaining Cleorita and Oviata as interpreters,
they enlisted the padre as the representative champion of his race in
their pastimes. But as an agile athlete his career was more successful
for the enlistment of mirth, than for either grace or speed, for he
fared worse than Dr. Baāhar in his trial with the family of the prætor,
as he was unable to hold the shadows of an old man, of an hundred and
sixty years, and his wife. Indeed, his movements and appearance
indicated that he was their elder in age, for with graceful steps of
equal pace, they kept their shadows from his feet, when in the eye of
the sun they were lengthened in the rise of the hill. The merriment
caused by his defeat cast no shadow over his happy face, but with
buoyant smiles he challenged Dr. Baāhar’s badinage with the desire of
testing his right to criticise. This accepted, he was again defeated,
without other evidences of chagrin than the frequent use of an
apologetic if, in disjunctive evidence of his ability to outrun the
best, when free from its restraint. The swift action and graceful
motions of the Heraclean women, maidens, and men in running exceeded by
far the highest descriptive flights of poetical imagination devoted to
wood-nymph disportings upon the velvet sod, or those of the sea upon its
margin of sand, in derivation from Grecian fable and song. While
bestowing the warmest encomiums in the honest expression of admiration,
the curiosity of the corps was excited to learn the means by which the
graceful uniformity of the women had been preserved, in disengagement
from the ungainly inheritance derived from the impression, supposed to
be inherent with their first estate. For, with our civilisation, a broad
expansion of pelvic continuations, with the angular articulation of the
lower extremities, are esteemed as a progenic provision for ease in the
functional speciality of procreation. The prætor answered from the
dictation of the Dosch: “Our censorial guardians have, from the earliest
date of Manatitlan direction, recognized the body’s unlimited capability
for improvement, under the restrictive advisement of an education
devoted to the kindly reciprocation of experience. Admonished by the
negative effects, described as the resulting cause, that had produced
with the women of your race unwieldy obesity, with a consequent lack of
animus power for current communication independent of language, they
studied to perfect themselves in the Manatitlan art of quality
improvement, for increase in affectionate transmission, from the impress
of exampled alliance, without words. The Doschessa invokes you to
conceive in imagination the impression that would be made upon our
women, if, without previous description they should discover a flock of
your Giga belles swinging up the avenue of the latifundium, with the
longitude, latitude, and circumference of their dresses in oscillating
sway from the movements of their limbs in semi-revolution, at an oblique
angle from their broad pelvic axis.”

_Mr. Welson._ “Fear would certainly be the first emotion, and I doubt if
upon nearer acquaintance they would be able to discover in them
qualities of merit sufficient for the stay of disgust. Unless, in their
kindly pity, they should look upon them as samples of a female species
of humans, who had in penance for stupidity been made to assume the role
of jennies, self-condemned as beasts of burden to bear the material
emblems of folly. Indeed, when fully impressed with the utter dearth of
their conceptive intelligence, beyond the formulistic rites of
fashionable instinct, and rote rehearsals of prayers for selfish
preservation, from the goading effects of self-immolation styled
conscience, even pity would be likely to suffer in trembling hesitation
upon the verge of abhorrence.”

We will now leave the prætor and Dosch to entertain their guests in the
courts and colonnades, while in reversion we complete our description of
the garden tableau. After the prætor’s departure with his guests,
Luocuratia, unmindful of aught else, gazed through her flowing veil of
hair upon the face of M. Hollydorf, with the wondering daze of the fawn
when surprised in its leafy covert by the gentle presence of woman. With
one arm still encircling her sister’s neck, yet seemingly unconscious of
her presence, she was recalled to herself, from the dreamy maze of her
vision, by the voice of her mother. Then she asked with fluttering
hesitation, “What is it?” Correliana caressingly removed the arm from
her neck, then gathering her sister’s flowing hair from her brow, bore
it back from her face, and while her mother bound it with a silicoth
fillet, whisperingly, with the prelude of a kiss, replied, “It is
yourself, Luocuratia, be calm, and to-night you shall know.” M.
Hollydorf, who had attended Correliana like a doomed shadow, from the
day they left the _Tortuga_, thinking and acting from her prompting,
even in matters pertaining to his professional avocations, had with the
first glance that he caught of her sister’s face, stood like one
transfixed, his eyes alternating from one to the other, until the
attraction of Luocuratia’s involved his own. Placing Luocuratia in her
mother’s charge, Correliana took M. Hollydorf’s hand and directed him to
a vine-covered alcove in the lower garden walk. When seated, she said,
“We are so thankful, for we are now saved from the inherent misery that
broods like a pall over your people. You will now be happy, but not
yourself again! If I should allow you to recover from the amazement of
your surprise, without an explanation, you might think me lacking in
truthful sympathy, which we hold, under direction, as the privileged
source of our affection. Advised, from the first, of the instability of
instinctive ‘love’ founded upon personal attractions, which is the
ruling incentive for marriage with your race, I withheld from you a
knowledge of my sister’s existence, and our twin resemblance, that her
affections might not be invoked with peril; for as you have felt, we are
endowed with the censorial essentials of perception in premonition of
cause and effect. The long delayed visit to our schools was deferred,
for the proof of your susceptibility to our current flow, and constancy
in affection; and we are happy in being able to feel the assurance that
the transfer of your allegiance to her keeping will be free from
regretful reflection. Notwithstanding the long endurance to which you
have been subjected, and the severity of the trial for the cure of your
self-imposed humiliation, the result not only compensates for your
suffering, but confirms the wisdom of the judgment that prompted the
restraint, by enhancing the zest with the security of a happy fruition.
The relief to me is unspeakable, for in my assisted study of your
peculiarities we have learned that from your appreciation of our
unselfish affection the idea of returning to your people has become
repugnant beyond the endurance of thought. Your sensitiveness so well
corresponds with Curatia’s in nature, that we are sure her influence
will aid you in transferring your sole reliance for happiness to
Heraclean keeping, but not in forgetfulness of your responsibility for
the welfare of your people. But it is well for you to understand her
inability to cope with selfishness, which we are informed, holds supreme
control with your race. Even my bolder nature that dared almost
inevitable capture by our savage foes, from the physical weakness of our
people, from want, shrinks with the thought of incurring the instinctive
abuse they are said to heap upon the good and evil alike, who oppose
their gainful lusts.”

M. Hollydorf’s countenance was at first moved with reflective
embarrassment, from the self-impressed accusation of inconstancy, but as
Correliana made no allusion to his defection, except for the expression
in grateful relief, his spirits gradually revived from selfimposed
oppression. Yet in attempting to express his appreciation of the
remarkable resemblance of features, his tongue refused logical
utterance. In anticipation of what he wished to say, Correliana bid him
rest easy on the score of the past, as a full relation of all that had
transpired would in no way impair the confidence of Luocuratia, but
would rather tend to increase the development of her affection from the
preference you have shown for her resemblance. This tacit sanction, for
the transfer, restored M. Hollydorf’s grateful impressions, which raised
his spirits to an unwonted degree of elation. But a serious shade of
thought having settled upon the brow of Correliana his apprehensions
were again startled. Observing the relapse she hastened to reassure him,
by asking, “How is it that you, and Captain Greenwood, have remained so
long under the rule of selfishness, with natures so quick for the
appreciation of our example?”

M. Hollydorf thoughtfully replied: “It was undoubtedly with us as with
thousands of others, whose thoughts in association were under the
control of evil example, in following the educated usages of the past
with unquestioning and reverential reliance, expressed in the fatuous
motto of society in all its grades, which contends that ‘what has been,
will be, to all eternity.’ This willfully blind abrogation of creative
indications for self-reduction to brutality, has been fostered by a
religion that directly encourages evil by offering the means of
redemption to the vilest, by rights and ceremonies which ignore the
practical evidences of purity and goodness. Offering in substitution,
vague terms which lure the stupid masses to present misery and a
hopeless material end. A modicum of these prestigical word combinations,
the padre has furnished for the education of your tonguester birds; but
if you should pass through the streets of our cities, with every step,
your eyes, nose, and ears would be saluted with defilements that would
cause you to shrink with shame from your kinship with civilized
humanity.”

“Alue!” exclaimed Correliana, with sadness, “we are so puzzled in our
endeavors to understand the source of the misleading infatuation; as the
means of happiness is so evident and easy, and their rejection so
labored, inconsistent, and unnatural, pardon my sincerity, that we are
constrained, from the testimony, to believe that civilized
enlightenment, with your other vague terms, are in fact the wordy
hallucinations of precedental madness. In the review of our past lives,
under the impression of your example, we have absolutely acknowledged
the impeachment, replied M. Hollydorf. Even Dr. Baāhar’s fantastical
ideas of precedental ‘virtue,’ derived from the vicarious nursing of a
maiden aunt, whose celebic worship was devoted to the curative
inspiration of a pill-box, which imposed upon him the humors of medical
study, has at last in so far yielded to the affectionate sincerity of
Heraclean example that he secludes himself when he worships, with the
smoke offerings of the pipe dedicated by imperial and princely lips, as
a reflection of worldly honors.”

_Correliana._ “But your women, M. Hollydorf? Do they no longer feel
within them the current affection bestowed for transmission with an
increase from happy usage?”

_M. Hollydorf._ “Here, in besieged seclusion, you have had but little
opportunity, even with Manatitlan teachings, to learn with a realizing
impression the besetting temptations of envious vanity, which have
beguiled our women from their natural inheritance of unselfish love; and
if their more extended and practical experience has failed to open for
understanding vision the vista of civilized woman’s folly, my efforts
will prove a bewildering aggravation to your already puzzled perception.
But if you persevere in your colonistic intention, and are able to
sustain the shock imparted from the degradation of your sex from all the
hopeful endearments that should render life desirable for transmission,
you will, I fear, despondingly lament the hopeless nature of your
undertaking. Then, you will, I doubt not, shed tears of bitterness more
acute from baffled sympathy, than those bestowed in memorial tribute for
your relatives when triply besieged by savage foes, famine, and
pestilence.”

_Correliana._ “But you have ruined cities, like old Heraclea, scattered
broadcast over the surface of your continents, which bespeak in as plain
language the end of folly, envy, hate, and revenge?”

_M. Hollydorf._ “These are visited by pilgrims of curiosity, who in
retailing their conjectural wares of relic origin, give no practical
heed to cause and effect for the inauguration of an era of educated
prevention. Yea more, on their return to the haunts of civilization
jostle with indifference living memorials of a misery as abject in
servile dependence upon drones, as the slaves who passed a laboring and
starving existence in rearing these ruined fanes of delusion for the
gratification of ambitious bigotry and despotism.”

_Correliana._ “But you, as men, represent the different nationalities
considered to be the most and least susceptible to kindly intelligence;
yet each of you, in your degree, have held yourselves, from choice, with
few exceptions, amenable to our example. All of your adherents have
acknowledged themselves better and happier than they ever expected to be
in life. Still, you doubt our ability to enlist, with the simplicity and
purity of our example, the affectionate reciprocations of your women?
Surely you speak in riddles of enactment and theory, as perplexing as if
in discourse you should say, empty barns full of grain. Are there not
many others among your learned men equally able to distinguish that
purity and goodness are in reality the source of happiness; and from
their own experience, that evil results in misery and woe? Then why do
your anticipations forbode for our kindly sympathies a distress so
dire?”

_M. Hollydorf._ “There are undoubtedly many thousands, if not millions,
who would hold themselves as gratefully amenable to your affectionate
example as the members of the corps, if they could be subjected to the
same experience. For we are in no way better than the well disposed
commonalty, and were as heedless before we were attracted by your
example, as the generality. Speaking honestly, in my own behalf, for my
own disparagement, I rarely, if ever, became disengaged in thought from
the instincts of selfishness while in association with the most exalted
of our kind. In truth, I never felt in the remotest degree that there
was a reality in the reputed second existence advocated by our
mythology, and was in no way impressed with an assurance of immortality,
until we were imperceptibly led to recognize its impression from the
example of yourself and people. But you must recollect that our meeting
was under peculiar auspices, which enlisted and absorbed our sympathies
to the exclusion of self, as if in premonition of the eventful
recompense following in train. No favoring circumstances like those
transpiring for our introduction, will be likely to prepossess our
people in your undertaking, for their own behoof, if we except the
sensational announcement which will herald your origin, in connection
with our Animalculan discovery. The impression that will be imparted
from your exampled exposition of the effects of Heraclean education will
prove as evanescent in the substitution of purity and goodness for the
material excitements of instinctive gratification, as the opening
imitations of the popular humorist, or lyceum lecturer, who attract the
attention of their audiences for an hour with quips and snaffles of
idiomatic license, or theories as valueless as shadows. If the
proscriptor’s compilations should fail to awaken their thoughtful
interest, in their own behalf, with a realizing desire for the
inauguration of a system of education for the benefit of succeeding
generations, then I fear that your treasured hopes will find in
recognition a tardy requital.”

_Correliana._ “But are not the emotions expressed by your word
friendship, the talismanic offshoots of affection; and will they not aid
our example enlisted for the inauguration of a system of education that
will bestow upon their children a living realization of immortal
impressions?”

_M. Hollydorf._ “Better by far that you rely upon your own unaided
example, and in no way venture your hopes upon the hazard of its trial!
For there is not in the word catalogue of instinctive delusions, one so
hypocritically heartless and treacherous. Friendship in demonstration
with our race, is, as the Dosch has informed you, a ‘marketable
commodity,’ as variable in expressed quality and price as the puff
stocks founded upon the gambling exchange of gold. It extends its
material aid upon like security in kind, and gold as the medium, is the
equivalent of grateful reciprocation. In fact, gratitude and friendship
in manifestation with us may be truthfully expressed as an ambuscade of
expectation lying in wait for the surprise of future favors. It grieves
me that I have no truthful resource from which to impart consolation and
assurance, in solace for the encouragement of your proposed adventure;
for, to our judgment, the sanction of the Manatitlan auramentors offers
the only hopeful warrant of its feasibility. But for the better
exposition of the instinctive heartlessness of our race, I will endeavor
to give you a true representation of the result of our discovery, if the
golden deposits of your mountains and rivers should be revealed to the
students of our colleges. Abandoning their studies they would lead in
the tide of adventurous emigration, and on reaching your city, heedless
of your example, they would take advantage of weakness as a license,
that in gratification would defy tears, pleadings, and expostulations
advocating your rights of local option. The Englishman would hold it as
his sovereign right to do as he pleased, with the certainty that his
government would hold you responsible for any resistance to his acts,
and with the pretext of an alleged affront, the ocean cormorant would
plume her wings and sharpen her beak and talons for your engorgement,
esteeming you and your city ‘lawful prey.’ Emigrants from my own, and
nations of kindred habits, would claim the philosophical privilege of
corrupting your fruits and grains, by brewing and distilling them into
strong drinks; which Tacitus, a historian of your race, alleges was the
practice of the Germans from the period of their earliest settlements.
But a few days, or weeks, would pass, before your city’s present cleanly
freedom from the evidences of detrition, would be changed into a sty
reeking with filth and saintly odors, and your temple schools into
progenic beer nurseries for the instinctive propagation of liberalism,
and sogdonian classics, peculiar to the transition period of the
incursive pot-pourri invasions of the northern, eastern, and western
hordes, into Germany. In usurpation of the current flow of affection,
that responds in grateful songs of praise to the Creator, the hoarse
croaking of maudlin revellers would make night hideous with strepitant
grunts of liberty and instinctive patriotism; while in vindication of
hereditary privilege, they would exhibit their memorial ‘love and
friendship’ by sword emblazonry tattooed upon each other’s cheeks,
chorused in medley with oaths from English, Irish, French, and other
idiomatic mouths as accompaniments to their manuals in the art of self
defense. If your people should adventure affectionate expostulation in
behalf of their children, they in reply would exhibit their bloated and
bleared visages as the fatherly source of a new and regenerate race of
freemen, delivered by the democratic efficacy of saving grace from the
pulings of puritanism. Well aware of my inherited defects and
unworthiness for the privileged enjoyment of your people’s purity, I
shudder with the reflection that the current of your affection could be
stayed, and forever turned backward, if by rumor the golden treasures in
utensil use should be bruited in the civilized purlieus of our cities
for the attraction of their troglodyte grovellers hitherward.”

_Correliana_ (with clasped hands and tearful eyes.) “May goodness
forefend us from a calamity so dire! Better by far the consummation so
long urged by our savage foes! But we must still cling to our hopes
founded upon your ready perception of an affection that enables us to
live away from human bodies with habits such as you have so wofully
described.”

As Correliana uttered in fervent appeal her invocation, the prætor
called M. Hollydorf to indicate the selection he had made from the young
maidens to fulfill the marriage intention with the verging graduates of
the male department? In answer to this quizzical request, he
acknowledged that the only maidens he had seen were Luocuratia and
Correliana, but with his happy impressions would endeavor to make amends
for his selfishness. All, with the exception of the padre, confirmed the
censor’s choice, but he with his usual uncertitude of thought made such
varied and liberal selections that in consummation they would have
proved sadly polygamous. The Dosch had already explained that the
education of the Heraclean children had been limited to the practical
requirements for the supply of family wants, in conducive aid for the
perfection of happy association. So that in the educational department
of letters the variety had been of the most meagre description, the
quota of information relative to the affairs of the world at large
having been supplied by Manatitlan auramentors. Accomplishments and
ritual formulistic ceremonies were unknown.

We were more than surprised with admiration, when we visited the kitchen
department, in which the manipulations were conducted with such ease and
purity, that our previous ideas entertained of housekeeping were quite
confounded. During our inspection of the kitchen, the busy hands of a
detachment of young maidens were engaged in the preparation of food for
the midday collation; their faces the while were beaming with the rays
of unspeakable gladness, and their eyes in condimental purity imparted
luxurious joy, as a relishing foretaste to the edible results of their
culinary pastimes. In keeping the bright glow of the unique utensils, of
beautifully alloyed gold, reflected in the convex and concave radiance
of their disks the lustrous embodiment of maidenly proportions, with
faces comically imaged in grotesque contrast with the reality. The
dwarfed reduction of their graceful forms and faces to a semblance in
breadth of visaged mouth, nose, cheek, and eyes, to the chattel biddy
instincts who hold untidy supremacy in the kitchen departments of
civilization, gave a mirthful vitality to the metallic expression that
heightened the ludicrous effect, so that under our watchful gaze, it
would occasionally culminate in the voiceful melody of a laugh. Purity
and order reigned supreme, so that there was neither odor or speck for
insect attraction. The effect of this ruling self-dependence was
heightened with vivid impression, from the expression of grateful pride
that beamed with the emulative exhibition of their “useful
accomplishments.” In their personalities they were so free from adhesive
taint, that the atmosphere seemed pervaded with the clarifying
transpirations of beings exalted above the grossness of mortality.

Our own unworthy selves, reflected in contrast from the clear
transparency of their bodily investments, caused us to shrink abashed
from the hallowed precincts that bespoke in their immaculate purity a
perfection that we had supposed beyond the reach of mortal attainment.
M. Hollydorf, who was of us all the most sensitively mindful in holding
himself amenable to the Heraclean example in personal purity, scarcely
ventured to cross the threshold, for among the hand-maidens Luocuratia
had taken her place, but with her thoughtful face tinged with blushes
shadowed from the dawning realm of unrevealed emotions. Her side-
glances, timidly regardful in wondering perplexity, surveyed the object
of her newborn attraction in thoughtful search for the evidences of
reciprocal impression. But the educated society sophistications of M.
Hollydorf’s instinctive self clouded the frankness of his expression
with the turmoil of impulsive excitement, that rendered him
unintelligible and diffident in bearing. This sensitive shield of
instinct baffled her longing search for the current impressions of
assimilation, imparting to her hands a trembling uncertainty, plainly
indicating that her devotions were not fully enlisted for the
ritualistic perfection required for the shapely modeling of the oracular
cakes intrusted to her leavening touch of purity. To our less enamored
vision her touch seemed to impart chaste consecration, for not the
slightest stain or discoloration from edible crudity, in preparation for
the elaboration of fire, was retained by her hands, so that in contrast
we were again inclined to revolt from ourselves. But with all our
opposition, intrusive memory forced upon us, with prompted aid, the
contrast of swinish priests administering their wafers of dough
desecrated by their filthy hands for the unthinking drove specialities
of the common herd. In verification of the common impression, the padre
whispered to Mr. Welson, “I wish to goodness I dared receive one of
those crumpets from her hands, for upon my soul I believe it would
shrive me for a taste of purity?”

M. Hollydorf overhearing the padre’s supplication cast upon him a
grateful look of appreciation. Admonished by our feelings of grossness,
we with reverence retreated beyond the charmed circle, but lingered
within view screened by a hedge of rose and honeysuckle, through which
our eyes paid worshipful devotion to the digital service of the kitchen
nymphs. Without the aid of mystic conjurations, the scene seemed
invested with a refinement of purity that exceeded the compass of
instinct, raising our capacities for the realization of beauty, with a
halcyon blending, for the perception of an enduring affection. Spell-
bound within our enclosure, delightfully absorbed with our thoughtful
contemplations, and nectarious impressions, varied with occasional
voiceful melodies, concerted in time to the movements of busy hands and
feet, we were startled from our reveries, and retranslated back to the
grossness of appetite, by the exclamation, “Oh, for a Tobias sausage,
well underlayed and flanked with gamey kraut, and a mug of foamy lager,
for I am as hungry as a bear.”

The body of Dr. Baāhar appeared in the rear of this hungry ejaculation,
enveloped in flowers and cuttings bestowed by the teachers from the
garden growths cultivated by the pupils. In a moment the carols of the
kitchen celestas ceased, and sidelong glances were directed to the hedge
to detect the intruder whose guttural accents betrayed the profanity of
his petition. The effect produced by this interruption may be truthfully
likened to the hush imposed upon the twilight warblings of the water-
thrush, swayed in tuneful measure upon the spray by the evening zephyr,
and the rippling accompaniment of a flowing stream, when its evening
carols are suddenly checked and silenced, for the night, by the croaking
heralds of darkness from the sedgy confines of a neighboring bog. Even
the padre, whose stomach had many a time and oft remonstrated with
indigestive harshness against the introduction of crab salad,—saur-
kraut’s English and American cousin,—egg-nogs, brandy smashes, and like
poetical compounds for its disposal, stood aghast at this profanation of
the divinities’ edible incantations. Finding himself unexpectedly
subjected to an array of admonitory glances, his eyes sought through the
openings in the hedge the cause of his cool reception, and with its
revelation became aware of his invocation’s apostate grossness. As he
stood peering through the leafy screen, forgetful of his flowery
decorations, he looked like a satyr wood-god of ancient devisement, in
orchidean envelope, regaling his sight with a surreptitious view of the
grove nymphs while adorning their persons for the festal mysteries.

Correliana, who came with the teachers to escort us to the refectory
colonnade, with the desire of the scholars that we would test the relish
of their food preparations, aided in disrobing the doctor of his flowery
dress; this accomplished we joined the parents and children who were
waiting to receive us in the vestibule. The tables were covered with
cloths of tinted white interwoven from the fibres of the plantain and
tree silk-floss, which produced a novel effect. This cloth was styled
Tapalmtræ, a web of lighter texture being used for raiment. When seated,
the Dosch addressing us from the platform of the tympano-microscope,
which had been transferred from the prætor’s table for the day, asked us
to bestow our critical attention upon the cloth, to detect its
conservative peculiarities for cleanly protection and rejection of
corrupt attaint. The brightness, purity, and softness of the fabric, had
not only attracted our attention as consonant with the characteristics
of Correliana, on the occasion of our first interview, although reduced
for the supply of others’ necessities, to the limits of modesty, in
extremity, but had with the scientific zest of curiosity been the
subject of speculative investigation after our arrival in Heraclea. But
since our introduction to the Manatitlans, it had only attracted our
attention, feeling well assured that all in accruance for mutual benefit
would in season be made known. “Its apparent peculiarities, in their
partial perfection, we have been enabled to bestow upon the Heracleans,”
explained the Dosch, “for their advantage during the trials of the
siege. Although, from the lack of material, and means of elaboration,
imperfect in comparison with our attainments in its illimitable
adaptation for the fulfillment of all material requirements for
protection, it has subserved with them for the supply of a protective
agent to their textile fabrics, conservative in transmissible durability
and sanitary purity. Its special adaptative qualities are the extremes
of mobility and immobility, and imponderability in degree sufficient for
relieving the impressions of weight. These, together with a non-adhesive
surface, with a capability for rendering it elastic and non-elastic to
either extreme, and indestructible from exposure to the elements, have
served as invaluable aids for comfort and their preservation. As an
effective aid for increasing the durability of textile fabrics, you can
judge when I state that the garments and cloths are heir-looms of
centuries’ transmission as well with the Heracleans as with our race; an
electrical current keeping them repulsively free from impurity, they are
to all intents new to each succeeding generation.”

_Padre._ “Why, what a boon the art will prove to the world? especially
to the poor, who will esteem you their benefactors forevermore.”

_Dosch._ “It has, with many other attainments, been achieved by goodness
for the perfection of purity; and as the miseries of your race are self-
inflicted from the stupidity of over-indulgence, its bestowal upon them,
in their present state, would prove an encouragement to evil, rather
than for its abatement. From this consideration we do not intend to hold
ourselves culpable by offering it as a premium for the cultivation of
selfish greed and luxurious indulgence. The scientific improvements of
your progressive race in the adaptation of vegetable, animal, and
metallic productions for the development of their tiger instincts, is
quite sufficient for the exemplification of their delusive aspirations,
without prostituting the labors of affection for the encouragement of
envious hatred.”

_Padre._ “But do you arrogate to yourselves greater goodness in your
decrees than God, who bestows sun and rain on the good and evil alike?”

_Dosch._ “Your distinction of Creative indications in the bestowal of
gifts, is, in delusive appeal an assumption characteristic with
sectarianism. It should be evident to perception, that Creative
benefactions extend to the whole creation, to the reptile, and monkey,
as well as to the higher grades of mankind. But the endowment of
humanity with powers of discernment to distinguish between good and
evil, is an indication of intention that directly implies the privilege
of choice for securing the results of happiness or misery. In other
words, if man prostitutes his privilege, and makes a brute of himself,
he must expect the living void of bestiality, and incapacity for present
happiness, with its affectionate premonitions of immortality.”

When seated, the prætor, while acknowledging the superiority of knives
and forks, drew from his hand its transparent glove, offering it as an
apology for the use of their fingers in eating, by showing that it was
repellant to adhesive matter. Although instructed in the use of chop-
sticks, and knives and forks, they were not yet proficient in their use,
and would prefer the use of their fingers with their silicoth gloves if
the habit would not offend? This accorded, a maiden was self-assigned to
each guest who adjusted Mappas (napkins) to their necks. Luocuratia,
radiant with blushes and smiles, assumed the charge of M. Hollydorf,
assisted by an Indian maiden of singular beauty. Correliana observing
the curious interest excited by her presence and others of her race,
introduced her by the name of Toitla, as one of their foster sisters of
the Betongo tribe, taken when infants and adopted for a hostage
education; their parents visiting them whenever an opportunity offered
without attracting the notice of their savage allies, a swinging bridge
having been constructed for the northern basin of the falls to
facilitate their entrance and exit unobserved. “To their gratitude,” she
exclaimed with tearful eyes, “we are indebted for the food that
preserved us from starvation, when the malignant river savages sowed
caterpillars and other noxious grubs upon the wind, from the brink of
the precipice, which destroyed our means of subsistence.”

After the first course of maize and banana-bread,—styled by the padre
crumpets, while under the moulding pressure of Luocuratia’s fair
hands,—the elder maidens seated themselves beside their parents, the
little ones taking their places, their busy eyes watchful for an
opportunity to render aid in supplying the wants of their parents and
guests. So well versed were they in the language of eyes, tongues were
rarely used. Our most skillful performer with the knife and fork caused
them to stand on tiptoe with wonder, in view of their rapid alternations
in the transfer of food to his mouth, although himself unmindful of
special notice. Whether the pantomimic expressions evoked from their
symmetrical hands, arms, and questioning eyes, were elicited from the
quantity or facile speed in the disposal of food, we could not judge. At
the close of the refection, the prætor remarked, that the impression of
their debt of gratitude was accumulating so fast from an increase in
happiness, they felt sensitively the poverty of their resources for
making suitable returns. “But if you will only wait with confidence, our
dispositions will find some method of recompense that will prove more
acceptable than metallic gold?”

Mr. Welson assured him if true happiness could be considered a meed for
equivalent reciprocation, the Heracleans had conferred far more by their
example than they had received.

_Dosch._ “Then you must fain remain content with each other, and bestow
your mutual aid upon the less favored for the recognition of your source
of happiness. As the day is drawing to a close, perhaps Dr. Baāhar will
favor us, and the other children, with his impressions and ideas derived
from his associations of the day?”

The doctor, without apology, responded as follows: “During the day I
have been so enchanted with the harmonizing voices of the parents and
children, free from chiding, whining importunities and reproachful
bitterness, common to our schools, both male and female, that I was
often prompted to speak to you of the effect that has ever been accorded
to harmony in musical concord, from the remotest antiquity; but checked
myself from reverting to classical fables in view of the brighter
reality of your example, which has impressed me with the reflection of a
future, made glorious with the realization of your true affection, as
the only abiding source of happiness. We feel ourselves novices in
appreciation and capacity for reciprocation, as well as in the power of
self-command, but will treasure your loving example for a clearer
perception of our faults of omission and commission. Notwithstanding our
gratitude has but recently emerged from its cocoon of selfishness, we
feel that its rays are brighter, warmer, and more kindly in their
influence and extension, and truly hope that we shall be able to reflect
your example for the lasting good of the well disposed. If the
possibility or probability of reducing a woman’s tongue, young or old,
of any race, to the limits of useful, witty, or consoling speech,
dictated from thoughtful impressions for kindly reciprocation, had been
advocated in my presence by the members of the royal scientific
societies of London, Paris, or Berlin, I should have given less heed to
their arguments in support of feasibility, than to the babblings of a
brook. Or if in prophecy, the scenes of to-day had been foretold as a
probable event likely to occur by any transition, I should have
attributed its source to the fantastical chimeras of a fool. Moreover,
if in thought suggestion the Manatitlan auramentors had substituted the
idea that I could improve upon ancestral precedents, I should have
thought myself, when free from their influence, subject to the freaks of
insanity. Albeit not much given to respect in following advice, or
imitating parental example in my youth, still both law and gospel
forbade one to think himself wiser in his generation than his
antecedents; from this prevailing authority we expected that our men
would wield their swords, and the women their tongues, in opposition to
their own promulgated ways and means of salvation, to the end. From the
light of this morning’s example I can realize, in view of the past, that
inconsistency is the soul of instinctive selfishness, as well as the
‘substance’ of law and gospel, upon which we found our vaunted
civilization. In addition, your system of education founded upon the
practical adaptation of study to the requirements of life, makes me feel
that I have used my brain as a store-house for the vile and useless
lumber of past ages, which had better have been buried in the
instinctive grave of oblivion. In fact, I have hibernated in common with
the class styled learned men, in company with the corrupt bodies of a
dead ancestry; and while subject to the winter gloom of instinct, have
existed in ritualistic dependence upon the fancied nutriment derived
from sucking my mental paws, while in truth exhausting my resources of
vitality, and hopes of immortality. But whatever there is in me left of
rational appreciation, capable of being cultivated in diversion from the
baneful influence of the past, shall be devoted to the welfare of future
generations, for the abatement of selfish greed which seeks to
accumulate in excess of self-requirements to the detriment of others.”

At the close of the doctor’s declaration of faith, the padre quietly
remarked to Mr. Welson, that he fully believed in the Manatitlans and
their power of thought substitution. Then, after even-song, Correliana
led in a hymn commemorative of Heraclean deliverance, of which the
following is an imperfect rendition:—

                “Father Supreme, our guide and stay,
                  When sore opprest for others’ wrongs,
                In pity, Thou didst ope a way
                  To save; to Thee the praise belongs.

                “Guide those, to whom we owe the aid,
                  Under Thy sole direction sent,
                That our paths of peace may be made
                  Through them the sign of great event.

                “That instead of war brings goodwill,
                Preferring kindred love to self,
                  That others’ joy may prove their skill
                In place of hoarding useless pelf.

                “Nor deem it ill, that they can learn
                From Manatitlans peaceful sway,
                  Love’s power to bring like return,
                And bear from hate the palm away.”

After exacting a promise that we would accompany their parents on their
next monthly visit, we were permitted to depart, and, as the temple
gates closed, held in review, with thoughtful silence, the scenes of the
day, feeling within us that they were the index of future happiness for
our race. Our thoughtful revery was broken by Lindenhoff, the corps’
genealogical curator of sound, who expostulated: “It is strange that the
Heracleans still continue to drone the old pæan cadences practiced by
the Greeks four thousand years ago, after hearing the Manatitlan
operatists; for they are really a wonderful people, and superior
musicians, notwithstanding their lack of power for the expression of the
deeper emotions of rage, love, and revenge, which are in reality the
vitality and soul of our great master’s compositions. They show but
little versatility in fugue movement, which expresses the gliding power
of musical intelligence; this certainly discovers a material lack of
appreciation, however accomplished they may be in other respects. In
fact, the Manatitlans would be esteemed as superior vocalists the world
over, if they could register a little more volume to their voices. I
would much rather undergo one of Mr. Welson’s practical jokes than
listen again to the droning of the Heracleans, for their execution was
perfectly shocking, and they have far less capacity in the lower scale
than the bumble-bee.”

The music taster’s criticism provoked a hearty laugh, but the padre,
with warmth, exclaimed: “Upon my soul, for the life of me, I can’t see
any cause for fault finding with sound, when the words harmonized so
well with one’s feelings of grateful sympathy. A good heartfelt
invocation from such voices, which were as beautiful as their faces,
should not be questioned by our coarse natures! Why, man alive, if I had
had the voice of a nightingale, it would have choked with kindly
emotions from the harmony of their affectionate solicitations in our
behalf! Faugh, man, your opera tral-la-la yells are as empty as the
screechings of cockatoos and the croakings of frogs in comparison! The
chord of sympathy they touched is beyond the reach of your Norma
quirketizations.”

All joined in hearty commendation of the padre’s strictures on the
hypercritical curator, Mr. Welson reminding him that the Maniculan
choristers would have failed to impress his sensitive ears with their
excellence without the magnifying aid of the tympanum. “In full chorus,
to the unassisted ear, their music would have sounded monotonous, hardly
reaching in volume the lisping chirrupings of an infantile cricket,
heard from its home in a distant cranny. As with your registrations of
impressions derived from its voice, the Heracleans would find Manatitlan
instruction wanting in volume for successful imitation. But,” he added,
as Correliana overtook them, “here is the offending composer; we will
now hear what she has to say in extenuation for neglect of opportunity
for improvement in the cultivation of fugue flights above the reach of
harmony.”

Correliana, observing the quizzical expression of mirth that accompanied
this appeal, inquired the cause. In answer, Mr. Welson rehearsed the
criticism of the curator, to which she blushingly replied: “You will, I
hope, consider in our behalf, when I acknowledge the justness of your
criticism, that before your arrival we were constantly harrassed with
troubles which required the active employment of our people’s thoughts
in the devisement of expedients for preservation. These kept us occupied
with the full enlistment of our sympathies, so that we could only
exercise our musical inclinations in the transmitted current of our
original songs of thanksgiving. But in our greatest distress we longed
for a harmonized extension of capacity, that you have supplied with
adjuvantic aids, from which, in time, we hope that we may be able to
render you satisfaction, with the evidences of industrious application.”

The curator of sound was too much abashed for an apologetic reply; and
the Dosch requested Mr. Welson to say, that for their evening’s
entertainment he would relate the circumstances that placed the
“dulcetina” in the hands of Captain Greenwood for disposal.




                             CHAPTER XXVII.


After the evening song of salutation, on the day following the members
of the corps’ visit to the school of the “ninyetas” they accepted the
prætor’s invitation to join with his family in listening to the recital
of the Dosch, which we transcribe.

                  *       *       *       *       *

During the ravages of the “coast” and yellow fever in Rio Janeiro in the
year 18—, it made sad havoc among our provincial offshoots of Brazilian
parentage, owing to a lack of means for provisionary precautions, so
that I felt it a special duty and privilege devolving upon me to give my
personal supervision for its arrest. The joint efforts of our Manatitlan
corps of censors and nurses soon succeeded in rescuing our adherents
from the deadly influence of the pestilence, affording us leisure to
render succoring advice to the good of the Giga race. Among the
foreigners, one had attracted my particular attention from the fact that
he studiously avoided companionship with others, beyond the enforced
necessities required for business relations. This, together with other
singularities pertaining to his deportment, attracted a desire for an
auramental investigation of the cause of his non-alliance with the herd.
My first discovery after entering into auricular communication with his
thoughts was, that his preference for communion with himself arose from
a natural repugnance for association with men in form, whose instincts
were degraded below the bestial capacity of the lower orders of
animality. This, I soon learned, had its origin from the sympathetic
impression of the animus of goodness revealed in desire. While studying
his characteristics, as a key for after-thought substitution, I found
that the intrusion of an indelicate impression from his own instinctive
propensities, or in word reflection from others, gave him acute pain. Or
when from natural promptings, induced from a genial disposition, he had
been influenced to listen to or relate a humorous story, strongly
tinctured with the passionate rulings of instinctive induction, for days
afterwards he would subject himself to remorseful reproof. These
sensitive traits, indicating a desire for the attainment of instinctive
purity, although rare in the associations of Giga men, are by no means
singular or unrealistic with the conceptions of the thoughtful. But a
lack of discrimination in society association, subject to the arbitrary
rule of money, blunts the perceptions of intelligent refinement, under
the impress of the selfish policy it imposes for the successful
enlistment of patronage. Vulgarity impairs the powers of inclination for
refined perception, in like manner and degree with the action of foul
odors upon the sense of smell, which renders it obtuse for the delicate
appreciation of a well selected bouquet.

With this reflective introduction of our auramentee, we will ask you to
picture him in meditative mood leaning against a huge pile of coffee-
filled bags, waiting in the shadow they cast upon the wharf to witness
the variegated effects of light imparted from the rays of the declining
sun upon the beautifully environed waters of the harbor bay of Rio de
Janeiro. The surface of the water, with its deeper blendings of green
and blue, were tinted with the yellow light, while the rippled wavelets,
gently moved by the waft of the evening breeze, sparkled in bright
effulgence as their crests toppled and broke in foamy succession.

As the sierra peaks of the des Orgoaes began to cast their long shadows
over the distant foliaged and villa-fringed bay of Jurbajuba, he was
attracted from his reveried meditations by the distant strains of music,
in harmonious accord with his mood. The instrumental combination in trio
was so blended in harmony that he failed to recognize their individual
characteristics, until a near approach enabled him to distinguish the
movements of the performers. While yet distant his attention was
impressed with the beseeching undertone of melancholy that pervaded the
apparently improvised variations of familiar melodies, as if in wailing
supplication for sympathy. As the boat approached the wharf, within its
shadow, the awning was retroverted to admit of the upright position of a
harp, supported by a woman yet young, but the resemblance of her
features to a boy and girl, sitting upon either side of the stern
thwart, proclaimed the relationship of mother. The children were yet
within their first decade of years, but had advanced to the stage that
rules with its impressions the after course of Giga life, in act, for
good or evil. Their instrumental prelude had attracted all within
hearing to the wharf, for the unusual tones of sad sweetness proved
alike irresistible to the troglodyte negro and more insensate sea-
monster of brutality, the slave-ship’s captain. The eyes of the mother,
whose face was overshadowed by the broad brim of a Tuscan hat, moved
with a quick glance from face to face of the gathered assemblage upon
the wharf, while she directed the concerted movement of her children’s
musical appeal, from violin and dulcetina, by touching in timed lead the
strings of the harp. When all accessible to her sight had been passed in
review, her eyes became suffused with the sad mists of disappointment,
which were imparted to her children’s, upraised with hope. Drawing her
veil to screen her emotions, she commenced a plaintive refrain, her
fingers imparting to the strings of the harp an anguished tone of
petition, so evident in its pleadings, that the uncouth negroes
reverentially removed the turbaned bandas from their heads in
recognition of the woful strains, and for the moment were raised above
the grovelings of their debased condition. After the third repetition,
the instrumental air was changed into an accompaniment for their voices,
which in song preferred the following petition in Italian and English:—

               “Father dear, art thou near?
               Then listen without fear;
               We came not to reprove,
               But erring steps to soothe.

               “Italy, dear land of our birth,
               Though exiled, the choicest of earth,
               Truly, thou wast cherished for love,
               With only one object above.

               “But alas, how frail was my stay!
               Beguiled by a wanton away,
               These pledges of love now remain,
               To haunt me with loss, and the stain.

               “To save, I have sought every trace,
               A pilgrim to this distant place,
               Hopeless, I have come in despair,
               And now forlorn, breathe the last prayer.”

When the refrain had been repeated for the fourth time without response,
or sign of recognition, the mother sank back on her seat; the harp
following, with its weight would have forced her backward into the
water, but for the timely arrest of the padrone. In a moment her neck
was encircled with the arms of her children, who bestowed, unabashed by
the curious presence of the assemblage, the spontaneous promptings of
their affection, in solace for the encouragement of hope. Never, in the
course of a life devoted to auramental association with the Giga race,
had I ever witnessed an influence that so quickly dispersed varied
evidences of brutality in human expression, as from these manifestations
of suffering in alliance with innocence, affection, and beauty, hallowed
in preluded expression of emotions by instrumental and vocal music. The
repulsive sensuality, so brutally prominent in the slave captain’s and
their “owner’s” visages, which exceeded in the loathsome vulgarity of
selfishness the hyena’s, gave place to the shadowy reflection of
sympathetic pity, as if from the impression of a reality retrieved from
the dim memories of childhood. In default of tears, to the moisture of
which their eyes had long been dead, they relieved their pockets of the
last representative coins of sympathy, for bestowal “in charity” upon
these wandering minstrels, who had recalled a flitting reminiscence of a
mother’s memory, which once entitled them to an alliance with
affectionate humanity. In contrast, the black faces of the negroes
glistened with moisture from eyes still open to the founts of primitive
sympathy; those acting as boatmen collecting the coins with scrupulous
honesty, deposited them in the sachels of the children.

The mother, aroused with the continued sound of falling money, for, as
with the exampled impulse of panic fear in battle, and the gambler’s
reckless course in the downward path of fate, charity becomes heedless
of self under the associate impression of congregated bestowal, made an
effort to free her eyes from tears, that she might give expression to
her thankfulness and stay the uncalled-for gifts of money. Then making
known her desire to land, the padrone directed the boat to the stairway
of the pier, the eyes of the children the while being engaged in a
wandering search among the spectators, with a woful expression of loving
desire. Ascending the stairway from the water, the motley crowd opened a
free passage; the foreigners following the example of the negroes,
removed their hats in token of respect. My auramentee had been greatly
moved from the first sound of the instrumental prelude, but the
appealing sadness of their voiceful invocation enlisted his sympathetic
excitability beyond control. Unable, with his utmost exertions, to
approach within speaking distance, he followed in the wake of the
procession until he saw the padrone and boat’s crew deposit the harp and
baggage of the mother and children, at the street door of a house
occupied by an _attaché_ of the English consulate, in a court opening
upon the Rua da Dereita. As their entertainer proved to be an
acquaintance of the auramentee, he returned to his hotel well satisfied
with the assurance of their congenial safety, which had fulfilled his
kind intentions. On the second day after their arrival he obtained an
introduction, and with an unobtrusive offer of service gained their
confidence. When but partially recovered from the anxiety and fatigue of
the voyage, they commenced their street perambulations as musicians,
with a pecuniary success more than equal to the exalted expectations of
favorite opera singers, which to the credit of the Rioans was bestowed
from the enlistment of true sympathy in their behalf, rather than in
acknowledgment for their musical talent. The family of the emperor
became interested from the universal expression of sympathy bestowed in
recognition of their sufferings; although the cause was unknown, they
extended to them their protection. Failing in their endeavors to
dissuade them from the exposure of street concertizing, by the offer of
a less laborious and more pleasing method of rendering their talent
provident, they were content to aid them with their special protection
and patronage. A week later, in a private interview, she gave them such
reasons for the course she had chosen, that they used their power to
facilitate the attainment of her object.

On the nineteenth day succeeding that of her landing, my auramentee was
detained until a late hour in the evening at his place of business, and
was hastening to pay a short visit to his _protégés_, when he was
intercepted by a messenger from a friend who had been suddenly
prostrated with an attack of the coast fever, who urged him to make
haste as the symptoms threatened a fatal issue. We found the doctor in
attendance on our arrival, who accepted a thought suggestion, and on the
supposition that it was his own, adopted the recommendation, which
served to relieve his patient from the fatal tendency, thereby relieving
my auramentee from his apprehensions, in time to fulfill his first
intentions. This fever scourge of Brazil differs from the yellow type of
northern latitudes; as in Rio, during the first stages of accession, it
is exceedingly erratic; suddenly appearing in one department to rage
with deadly vigor for a few days, and then in apparent transfer,
subsiding, to reënact in a remote district its fatal ravages. At a later
period of its sway, when the partially exhausted venom has become more
generally dispersed, it flits hither and thither with demon activity,
fastening upon its prey without premonitory symptoms, perceptible to
curative observation, devoted to empirical treatment, although
distinctly visible in inceptive cause to our censors. Even with
coincident cause and effect clearly exposed for detection in current
transfer, the Giga physicians utterly ignore ante-investigation, for
prevising the means of prevention. This observance of limits,
overleaping adjoining, to locate itself in remote districts, gives plain
indication of local infecting agency, and we discover that the
fermentable cause was overlooked, and allowed to exhaust itself in
putrefactive dissemination. With this hint, in recurring attestation of
the fatuous fatalism that will ever attend the curative devisements of
humanity, while they neglect the means of prevention, we will resume our
demonstration in narrative vindication of the axiom, that remedy is
inherent with the cause.

But a few minutes had passed, after the auramentee had reached his
hotel, before he was summoned to the house of his Italian _protégés_. On
our arrival we found the mother in the height of the febrile stage of
the plague’s accession, but calm and resigned in thought, although
impressed with a premonition of the disease’s fatality, which with our
knowledge we felt that it was impossible to avert, still we suggested
remedies for transient relief. With the morning’s dawn, after soothing
the anxious fears of her children, she expressed to them her desire to
converse with the auramentee alone. Notwithstanding the unusual nature
of the request, it was cheerfully complied with. She then related to him
the cause of her husband’s estrangement and desertion, affirming that
her sole object in following him was for his rescue from self-inflicted
wretchedness, as she had brought with her a feeling of fatality, that
warned her that her own and children’s days were numbered. This feeling
had been confirmed in her mind by the strange sympathy which had been
shown in her behalf, as the source of her sorrows was only known to an
appreciative few. We used all our powers of persuasion to induce a more
hopeful mood, by endeavoring to convince her that she was yielding to
superstitious feelings unworthy of the courage which had sustained her
through the trials of desertion, and her long search which had been
continued in a manner humiliating to the affectionate pride of a mother
in behalf of her children, exhorting her to bear up bravely until she
had achieved the object of her mission. With a wailing sigh, quickly
suppressed, she averted her face, while with choked utterance, scarcely
raised above a whisper, she despairingly murmured, “I have seen him.”

Surprise, mingled with an oppressive sorrow, held us speechless; for
words of sympathy, however pure in expression, would have added to the
pangs of her agonized affection, which seemed already struggling for
liberation from the body, held back by her children’s love; but divided,
and bereaved of the sentient unity of her affection, grief overshadowed
and dimmed her assurance of a happy immortality. A silence of many
minutes followed, unbroken save by convulsed sobs, which she vainly
tried to suppress; at last a flood from the fount of tears enabled her
to regain self-command, but only to be borne back for the realization of
deeper woe. Her children, with anxious solicitation for the revival of
fond memories, had caught the reflection of their mother’s lullaby, with
which she had soothed them in dawning infancy, when with undimmed eyes
she had breathed her affection in song. Then no cloud had arisen to
darken with its gloom the joys of her wedded life. The daughter had been
encouraged, with guided hands, to touch the strings of the harp during
the period of toddling babyhood, when from feeble, faltering incertitude
an answering response came to the mother’s leading song. Soon her tiny
fingers, instructed by a retentive memory, enabled her to render with
remarkable accuracy the most difficult compositions within the compass
of her reach. The sadly harmonious memorial that had opened with renewed
anguish the fount of the mother’s tears, was the sleep requiem early
impressed on the daughter’s dawning memory. Commencing with an imitative
prelude, suggestive of childhood’s hesitating touch, accompanied with
her brother’s violin, the various canzanatas were modulated with the
far-off lisp of invocation, as if from dawning perception, intuitively
increasing in volume until it reached the flowing harmony of present
maturity. From the joyous expression of childhood’s buoyancy, the strain
suddenly changed into the sad wailing of uncertainty, improvised with
mournful variations descriptive of their wanderings and disappointments.
Again, in renewal, as if led by some inspiration beyond their control,
they reached their present source of sorrow. The burden of the plaintive
strains was frequently interrupted with sobbing outbursts, rendering
their touch tremulous and uncertain, the efforts made for suppression
being easily detected by hesitations, which they endeavored to cover
with bolder movements. Recovering, as if with the sudden impression of
hopeful assurance, there came a stream of melody of inconceivable
purity, as from an echo of futurity bearing in waft joyful gladness.
This change caused the mother to whisper, with tears fresh flowing over
a sadly joyous expression, “I would have so, it is our requiem.”

With the lullaby, that was improvised in quick succession, the mother
again clasped her hands convulsively, while the spasmodic workings of
her compressed lips and trembling eyelids bespoke the inward struggle
made to suppress the gathering strength of her emotions. But with the
rehearsal of the melodious symphonies of the halcyon days of united
love, grief found vent in an abundant flow of tears, which called forth
from the auramentee stifled throbs of masculine sympathy. But while the
melodies were growing more earnest in the sad sweetness of their
expression, the strain suddenly ceased with the startled cry of,
“Father!”

The mother sprang from the bed, but with tottering dizziness fell back,
still retaining her consciousness with a placid expression, which
despite the ashy paleness of the face bespoke the full consummation of
earthly hopes. The children gently opening the door led in the wretched
father, upon whose features were imprinted with haggard remorse the
interwoven lines of despair. Blind with the searing touch of hopeless
shame, he passed the auramentee unnoticed; then pressed down by the
remorseful revival of first affection, he knelt at the bedside and was
enfolded in his wife’s arms. Not a syllable had been spoken save the
word, father, and the auramentee feeling that his voice and presence
would prove alike embarrassing, quietly withdrew.

Five hours later, while crossing the palace plaza on his return from a
walk on the Botofogian beach, we met the husband hastening back to his
house of refuge and partner in disgrace. Although evidently bracing
himself for the utmost exertion of his powers of resistance and speed,
in opposition to the foe whose seal was legibly visible in the ashy
paleness of his face, the wavering uncertainty of his steps betokened
speedy prostration. The natives, accustomed to the symptoms, detected
the cause of his swaying progress, and held their course as far to the
windward as possible, following his movements with eyes subject to the
instinctive fascination that a person under the doom of deadly infection
attracts. Becoming fully impressed with his condition from increasing
weakness, and the fixed stare of the passers-by, who avoided him, his
steps faltered and a momentary shadow of dismay caused a wavering of his
eyes and lips; but in quick revulsion he again braced himself, with a
determination that bespoke the energetic self-possession of the
Englishman in extremity. Leaning against the palace wall, which he had
reached, he hastily buttoned his coat to his throat, then drawing in his
breath resolutely, he again started forward with a defiant stride. But
he was in the deadly grasp of a foe who toyed with his mortal powers as
relentlessly in sacrificial oblation, as he had with the ties of
affection. This fact his tottering steps soon betrayed, for in despite
of his desperate struggles he sank back in a half kneeling and leaning
position against a pediment of stone, in transition for the tower of a
neighboring church, while its priest passed by on the other side hastily
crossing himself and muffling his face with aversion.

The imploring language of his eyes, which he cast around with beseeching
entreaty for help, moved even the stolid pity of the natives to unwonted
activity, causing them to start in search of the brotherhood in charge
of the department. But the auramentee, forgetful of the unfortunate’s
great wrong, gave him supporting assistance, while urging with his voice
the necessity for the utmost exertion of self-determination. Pointing to
the Hotel des Estrangeiros he made an effort to take from his pocket a
card partially in view. Understanding his wish, the auramentee took it,
adding to its anticipated intention in his own handwriting, “sick with
the fever,” dispatched it by a kindly hand to its destination. Scarcely
five minutes elapsed before a female form darted from the portal and
directed her steps in wild dismay to the stricken one’s side, and
kneeling claimed the support of his head, while with a kiss she
supplicated, “Oh, Edward, what can I do?” A faint smile lighted his face
at this appeal, as he whispered the ever abiding talismanic word,
“home,” so dear to the honest attachments of instinct, however much
misused in collateral signification. The auramentee then entreated him
to muster all the energy possible in aid of their support. Raising him
with great difficulty to an upright position upon his feet, all his
efforts to walk proved abortive, but a kind-hearted Frenchman who was
passing, volunteered his aid to bear the doomed bodily to his hotel and
bed. By profession a nurse, the Frenchman undertook the patient’s
charge, after he was placed in bed, but gave no hopes of his recovery;
on the contrary, with the coolness of a physician, urged him to use
quick dispatch if he wished to dispose of anything by his will for the
living advantage of others, as it was impossible for him to live longer
than two or three hours.

A smile, with the answering words, “It is well,” aroused the anguished
despair of the being, who still ministered with all absorbing thought
her tender care and caresses, bringing forth the expostulation, “Oh,
Edward, Edward, if you go, you must not leave me! for wherever you go, I
must go with you!”

The dying man raised his eyes to hers with a look of unutterable
fondness, then, with mustered energy, whispered: “Julia, it is hard to
part from you, after so much suffering. But living, it would prove to us
both a continued scene of remorseful misery, without the possibility of
atonement, while dying, I have gloomy forebodings that there will be for
us no future. Yet, whatever may come after death, it is better that I
should die as the cause, than live as the renewed source of misery to
others.”

Such a look of despairing desolation as she cast upon her expiring lover
I had never before seen depicted upon the face of Giga woman. Her
beauty, surpassing, in fair unblemishing complexion those of kindred
type, was refined by the hopeless anguish of its expression, which in
its passionless void betokened, as with him, a reviving hope struggling
for the bodily retrievement of an assured immortality. At the expiration
of an hour, her arm that supported his head grew lax and nerveless; but
his efforts to raise himself recalled her thoughts for his assistance.
Perceiving that it was his desire to be left alone with her, while he
yet retained his consciousness, the auramentee was prompted to inform
him of his kindly attentions bestowed upon his wife and children, as it
offered the opportunity of affording mutual consolation, by conveying to
his wife and children some affectionate token or message. The
announcement revived his energies, imparting to his “allovee” a kindred
impression of desire. Beckoning the auramentee nearer, in earnest,
whispered accents, he implored him to plead with his wife, Julia’s
forgiveness, as the “sin” of desertion was wholly his own. “Say to her,”
he continued, “that it was my own unencouraged infatuation; against
which she, loving, did all that she could to resist my entreaties,
striving earnestly in the toils to escape from me and ‘love’s’
allurements. She is not wanton, but pure and devoted as a wife can be,
although misguided. It is my own ‘heart’ that is divided, even in death,
which makes me feel doubly thankful for its nearer rescue.”

Charged with this message we left them, Julia courting the virulence of
the malady with an assiduous intention that plainly declared her
determination to share in death his grave, in opposition to his own and
the Frenchman’s vehement protestations. We reached the bedside of his
wife in time to receive her last recognition, who answered with a smile
and pressure of the hand her husband’s last petition, and while passing
away invoked, with the reviving spark of conscious vitality, the
auramentee’s guardian protection of her children, should they survive,
as she was aware that they had been seized with the fever in the
presence of their father, who had bestowed upon them his care with the
intention of returning. After bestowing upon the children his
affectionate care in the fulfillment of his accepted charge, he hastened
as speedily as possible to the bedside of the doomed husband, and found
the dying lovers supported in each other’s arms. For Julia, in the short
period of our absence, had excited the latent seeds of the infection,
and was already nearing the confines of her desire. The husband,
although speechless, still retained his consciousness, with the power of
making known, with grateful expression, the consolation imparted from
our tidings. Julia, in anticipation of death, placed her attendant in
charge of the auramentee, desiring him to send her back to Italy, as she
had followed her own misguided steps from affection. The auramentee
promised the faithful discharge of all their wishes in the event of his
own preservation. Then with a sorrowful farewell, in freedom from the
bitterness of our first impressions, we left them with a sure remedy at
hand for the cure of their self-inflicted unhappiness. Returning to the
children, we bestowed upon them our personal care and affection until
death relieved us of our charge; but the scenes that preceded their
final departure from life are too harrowing for recital. Let it suffice,
that on the morrow when the western hills cast their shadows over the
city, under the upward halo of the setting sun, the father, mother, and
children, with their cousin Julia, whose beauty was the sad cause of her
own and their misery, were borne together, in their bodies’ materiality,
for burial far beyond the city’s limits. The place of interment had been
granted as a special mark of interest by the emperor, whose family were
deeply affected by the tragic end of their _protégés_. The harp, violin,
and dulcetina were retained by Captain Greenwood, the auramentee, as
mementoes of the sad scenes described, and are held in “devout”
estimation as pledges of affectionate remembrance.

Annette, the companion of Julia, while assisting in packing the
instruments for shipment to Montevideo, displayed versatile
accomplishments as a musician that astonished Captain Greenwood, and
while playing some airs found noted in the satchels of the children, she
was frequently moved to tears, and in explanation of the cause, it
transpired in revelation that she was the daughter of Signor Pozzuoli,
the inventor of the dulcetina, and early teacher of the children, a
majority of the preserved musical annotations being of her own
composition. On the day previous to the one appointed for the sailing of
the steamer for Montevideo the captain proposed to introduce Annette to
the consignee of a ship about to sail for Leghorn. She then declared her
desire to accompany him to Montevideo, as she felt a disinclination to
return to Italy, urging that her musical ability would prove amply
sufficient for her support, if he would assume the character of guardian
for her countenance and protection. From the mutual interest engendered
from the scenes through which they had passed, the captain encouraged
her decision, gladly assuming the charge of protector. In closing, the
Dosch said, I have related the history of the dulcetina, with desire of
enforcing the absolute necessity of the Manatitlan system of education,
if the Giga race really wish to bequeath happiness from unity in the
marriage alliance, as a memorial source of example to succeeding
generations. As scenes of the kind are constantly increasing in an
engendered series from degenerate inoculation, with thoughtful
consideration its practicability must be apparent to the meanest
capacity. The relation will also impress upon you the characteristic
value of your late companion, when relieved from the influence of habit,
as well as the discernment of Correliana, which penetrated beneath the
crisp asperities of his outer husk. In the exceptions we are about to
advise, you will recognize the prudence of our judgment. The “brides”
will surely afford an invincible security from their incorruptible
purity and goodness, which, with kindred beauty in personal endowment,
would insure constancy in defiance of all the temptations that could be
proffered by the most lauded belles of civilized society, even if the
ages of their intended husbands were less by two thirds. The countenance
of Correliana, during the recital of the Dosch, was a mirror of
reflection for the grateful expression of her thoughts.




                            CHAPTER XXVIII.


On the third morning after our visit to the school of the ninyetas, the
prætor and the tribune teachers with Correliana and her mother called at
the quarters of the corps, to escort M. Hollydorf to the prætorial
colonnades, as the husband elect of Luocuratia, for the fulfillment of
his probationary term. After receiving the congratulations of adoption
from the Heracleans, all joined in the matin song of thanksgiving in the
lower fora. While the prætor and his wife were absent, aiding Luocuratia
in her valedictory salutations, M. Hollydorf was entertained by
Correliana and the Doschessa. In order that he might perfectly
understand the premeditated process of transfer, and security achieved,
Correliana stated: “The Dosch had auramentally learned your
determination to make Heraclea your home three months ago, and suggested
the apt adoption of your peculiarities to her disposition; but until
convinced of your constancy to our customs he advised the course we have
pursued. The result of your trial has proved of happier import than we
anticipated, as well as of Luocuratia’s ready infilmentary adaptation
for the unity of impression; but now you can rest assured that her
thoughts have already become interwoven in desire with your own, so that
your example will be held paramount to ours. After the bewildering maze
your presence caused was dispelled, her thoughts were directed for the
shadowy investment of your image with her own as a prelude for more
perfect realization, with a success which imparted a trust free from
doubt or fear in question of its fulfillment; in this mood I left her,
promising to visit her in the evening. In keeping with my appointment, I
found her awaiting my coming in the garden, in full confidence that,
with my aid, whatever there might be of mystery to her veiled
comprehension would be cleared for her perception’s perfect
understanding. With an endearing caress, fluttering with the timidity of
a newborn joy, her eyes drooping in tremulous expectation, were filled
to fullness with happy anticipations, as she leaned her head upon my
shoulder, invoking with attentive silence my aid for the full
interpretation of her waking vision. That she might taste the cup of my
own realized joy, without tantalizing prelude, I rehearsed your confided
doubts and fears as the counterpart of her own, the while encircling her
waist with my arm, in support of her head’s nestling repose, that the
body’s medium of a sister’s affection might more fully open to her the
gates of revelation; then to the trama of her love I interwove, through
the shuttled impulses of her ear, the vibrating threads of your
affection, until they became involved with the stamina of your stronger
nature; then the rustling sigh of relief bespoke the double investment
complete in the unity of confiding reciprocation. This accomplished,
inasmuch as the agency of my influence could represent the responsive
source of sexual alliance, for the embodiment of affection, she became
so deeply absorbed with sweet meditative reflection that she was
unconscious of my departure. This ingraft of affection, in surety so
propitious, should engender solicitude, on your part, in behalf of your
race; for enjoyment ever lacks full maturity, when we feel that there
are others with the prestige of purity and goodness, who are denied our
privilege from the want of kindly direction.”

To which supplication, M. Hollydorf replied:—“Truly thankful for your
pleading consideration, however little my faults merit your lenity, I
must ask your continued forbearance; as you can scarcely imagine from
the purity of your associations, the depth of insincerity that must ever
oppress and haunt me with the bitterness of reflection for my
unworthiness, in accepting the boon of an alliance that so far exceeds
my present capacity for just appreciation. But if the neglected germ of
good intention, brambled by evil example, can be redeemed to offer an
equivalent worthy of your acceptance, it shall be my constant study to
withhold your memory from the past, which is beyond the reach of
extenuation, by the integrity of an exampled affection.”

_Correliana._ “That you may feel to the full extent the confidence
bestowed with Luocuratia, my father has left his written salutation for
presentation, which with your permission, I will read, that it may
convey to you the living warmth of a personal address.

                  *       *       *       *       *

 “‘To M. HOLLYDORF, _Director of the Heraclean Deliverers_:—

“_Carrissimus_, acting upon the information received with advice from
the Dosch and his advisers, and your own confidence imparted to my step-
daughter, Correliana Adinope, affording verification of our own
observations, that there exists a unity of attachment between you and
her twin sister Luocuratia, we offer you with unspeakable gladness our
joyful congratulations, with the sum of our united affection. In
bestowing our fullest sanction, we are truly happy in being able to
contribute, from our Heraclean resources, the means of perfecting our
ties of grateful reciprocation, and rejoice that we have achieved the
privilege of calling you by the endearing name of son, as you were in
anticipation wedded to our affection. In accepting our daughter for the
cultivation and solace of mutual affection, you will have our assurance
of her enduring devotion, which no mischance can abate; for with her the
animus of goodness exceeds in thoughtful intention the power of
expression. In her affection you will find an allied support all-
sufficient for happy sustenance, and in its overplus an index of the
homage outflowing in reciprocation from every Heraclean. In conformity
with the happy experience of our ancestors, we herewith, in addition to
our verbal invitation, proffer the formality of script, with the desire
that you will become a member of our household, in domiciliation, during
the three months allotted for probationary exemplification of
congeniality in habits necessary for unity in affectionate
reciprocation. Luocuratia will return to gladden our colonnades at the
approach of noontide, then with your presence our joy will overflow in
thanksgiving to the Source of direction, that devised the achievement of
our deliverance through your instrumentality.

                                                               ADESTUS.”

Correliana, while reading her father’s script welcome, watched with keen
interest its effect, and was recompensed to an extent exceeding her
expectations, by the warmth made manifest from the grateful emotions of
the respondent. Fully satisfied with his relief from the sensitive
reproaches of his disposition, for thoughtful diversion from his waiting
suspense, she appealed to the Doschessa for encouragement in behalf of
her meditated mission for the colonistic establishment of schools for
the educational intuition of self-legislation, among the civilized Giga
races. “Have you, in your auramental experience, which enables you to
reach and advise the thoughts of Giga women, found them all so abjectly
subservient to the trammels of society and its fashionable tyrannies?”

_Doschessa._ “The exceptions are simply modified, all worship at the
same shrine of thoughtless fatuity, with a heedless tendency for the
utter extinction of purity and goodness.”

_Correliana._ “Alieu, woe is with our hopes, if to such a depth of
desecration the animus of purity has befallen with our sex! Surely, she
must still retain the germ of her affectionate inheritance; and with the
lead of our example it must revive with the nourishing warmth of a
mother’s love.”

_Doschessa._ “In truth, we have never failed to discover in women, when
free from the actual vices of corruption, the latent spark of goodness
that with exampled cultivation may be revived for truthful
reciprocation. Dependent as we have been upon auramentation for the
invocation of purity in thought, the impressions are as transient as the
conjurations of a dream, which give place to the more tangible waking
visions of sense. If the current of their superficial conversation could
be stayed, for the silent inception of thought, your mission would be
rendered easy. Perhaps the irresistible impression of your own and
companion’s beauty, will surprise from envious covetousness sufficient
thought for the detection of an inceptive source, with the desire for
its privileged bequeathment to their children? For often in selfish
lamentation we have heard Giga women supplicate in prayer for the
abatement of their own scandalous dispositions. One of their formulistic
invocations to the ‘throne of grace,’ offered as an oblation for the
“contrite heart,” I will repeat:—

      “‘Purge from me hypocrisy, ere I from life depart,
        And all deceptions, that belong to the lying art.
      Then purify love, from thoughts of material sense,
        And make me feel that goodness responds to future tense.’”

This accusative conviction is by no means rare, and the purity of your
personal appearance, in consonance with exampled goodness, might attract
thoughtful consideration from its contrast to the degrading attrition of
selfishness subject to the material influence of gold. Your example
might lead them in train to adopt our dress, which is light and
‘elegant,’ subserving all the requirements of bodily freedom, and purity
in protection; if so fortunate you would remove the embargo of
oppression from their bodies, and the curse of talkative frivolity from
their tongues.”

Here the Doschessa was interrupted by the sound of light footsteps,
quickly followed by the voices and presence of Cleorita and Oviata, who
with an escort of Kyronese maidens came bounding into the triclinium
with the joyful announcement, “He’s coming!” Pale and breathless,
Correliana, without waiting for farther words of explanation, sped
forth, her feet with dainty touch kissing the earth with gladness,
passing with the swiftness of an arrow in its flight those already
hastening down the avenue of the latifundium, apprised of the near
approach of Captain Greenwood. First, she passed Mr. Welson and Dr.
Baāhar, then with graceful ease Mr. Dow, whose lank form and longer
strides had distanced his associates; even the mayorong, inured to an
active mountain life, and long journeys on foot, now fledged with the
grateful remembrance of his people’s preservation, was left behind. Then
as Captain Greenwood, urging his mule to its utmost speed, caught her
view as he entered the cinctus gate, the earth seemed to respond with
elasticity to the touch of her feet, and before he could dismount from
his quadrupedal conveyance, he was clasped in the frank embrace of her
arms, and had received her kiss of welcome, while her face, eloquent
with smiles and tears of joy, became radiant with beauty in contentful
expression. Her hushed silence, from the fullness of happy enjoyment,
was aroused from selfish indulgence, by the salutation of her father to
his already adopted step-son. Still in half embrace, as if loth to
relinquish the body temple animated with the shrine of her devotion, she
was not forgetful of the affectionate relation she held foreign to self.
Her parents and sister, who had followed with equal steps, but had held
anxious desire aloof, until the fullness of her first emotions of
gladness had subsided, were first made known to each other with
affectionate designations, newly fledged from the English idiom. In turn
the captain received embraces of welcome from each, which unloosed his
tongue from its accustomed reticent caution, Correliana’s still
encircling arm causing the grateful current of speech to flow in accord
with her own emotions.

The family scene closed, M. Hollydorf, in freedom from rival jealousy,
gave his cordial salutations of welcome, which were followed by the
other members of the corps. Then the Heracleans and Kyronese claimed the
privilege of expressing their affectionate gratulations. The mayorong,
distrustful of his power for expressing the reverential emotions of his
gratitude, for the deliverance of his people from their extreme peril,
although second to the prætor’s family, in greeting with his presence
the captain’s entrance, had allowed all the precedence. Approaching the
captain, when beckoned by the prætor, hereditary impulse inclined him to
prostration, but the humiliating act was arrested by an energetic
embrace which relieved him from his embarrassment. While the prætor was
gratefully presenting the Betongese for the captain’s kindred
recognition, attention was attracted by the musical call of children
from his incoming train. Mr. Welson, recognizing the voices that were
making the name, Don Guillermo’s, melodious, on approaching, in quick
transition, found his neck enwreathed with the arms of his little
favorites, Lavoca and Lovieta, whose eager curiosity, after bestowing
their kisses of welcome, inquiringly asked, in whispered accents, who
the angel was that embraced the captain, and the other, and others?
Supporting with his arms, their bodies pendent from his neck, Mr. Welson
carried the children to Correliana and Luocuratia, “and the others,” to
receive from their lips the much coveted welcome; which was given with
such loving zest, that sweet surprise made dewy their jetty eyes, while
their cheeks glowed through the olive tint, embrowned from exposure,
with an exquisite blending that enhanced their rare infantile beauty. As
all the Heracleans and Kyronese matrons and maidens claimed the
privilege of surprised affection, in bestowing the salutation of
welcome, it was long before they were restored again to the full
possession of Don Guillermo, and then were so mazed with delightful
impressions, and wondering gladness, that they were unable to give
heedful answers to his inquiries. At length, after an apologetic round
of besitos beneath his grizzled moustache, which caused him, laughingly,
to utter the interjectional expostulation “bas-tan-te,” they in rambling
relation commenced the rehearsal of events which led to their transfer
from parental care and their natural home.

Observing his inquiring gaze directed to a young woman, whose eyes were
occupied with curious admiration in following the changing variations in
the scene enactment from the loving outflow of affection evoked by the
captain’s advent, Lovieta and Lavoca exclaimed with united voices, “Oh,
that’s Annette, our governante, we love her very much.”

Then with childlike simplicity, peculiar to Spanish infantas, they
informed him that she was a nice beautiful teacher of music, and
everything else, and Captain Greenwood’s sister, but not in the regular
way, although they were very fond of each other. “Father loves them very
much, and when the captain told him he was coming to live here for good,
she said, that with his permission she would go wherever he went, and
make his home hers. This made him very glad. Then father seemed to be
sad with thinking, and then he loved us so much while shedding tears,
that when we could speak, we asked what made him so triste? He said, he
wanted them to take us to Heraclea that we might be educated so that we
would be always good, and could be present with him and mamma although
absent in body, which would keep them from feeling sad and lonely. But
we could see that mamma and he were very, very triste. This made us
sorry. So he talked to us of all you had written of the happiness of the
people here, because they were truly good and pure in their love toward
each other, without selfish concealments; then we were glad and wanted
to be with you. The mammatits you sent, who have been with us all the
way, told us all about the school, and how loving the children were
toward each other, which made them always very beautiful; but you, nor
they, didn’t tell us that there were angels here. Then they said that
there were no dolls here, for the larger nines helped to care for the
ninaquillas,—how very, very beautiful they are,—do they never grow old
and ugly here, so that they have to paint their faces, and scold like
grandma, because people don’t like them? Then, as we were a going to
say, mother don’t feel exactly safe with herself, and becomes fearful,
when grandma talks to her of her soul’s perdition, which we can’t well
understand, only that it’s padre Molinero’s doings. So she wanted us to
come here before we were too old to enter the school, that she and papa
might visit us and learn how to be truly affectionate without talking
too much; but we don’t see, now, how that can be; ay, ay, pobre mamma
and papa! But they said it was for our happiness that they wished to
send us, which we can now see. How beautiful, nice, and clean everything
looks! Is it always so? And papa said, that without us his home would be
desolate. Then mamma looked at him wild like, but so pitiable, and
choked so, then looked so sorrowful, that we hugged and kissed her and
whispered we wouldn’t go away and leave her; then she said, ‘Pedro?’
soft like, and papa took her in his arms, and we all cried together; but
so happy, it didn’t seem like crying, and couldn’t speak for ever so
long a time, but then we felt so content, when we thought so lovingly,
and said nothing. Then when mamma could speak, she said whisperingly and
softly, so that we could scarcely hear her for our crying, ‘Pedro, it is
better they should go, and I will try to make you feel that your house
and home are not desolate.’ Then he kissed her and we all cried again
for joy. But grandma made us feel so unpleasantly by saying that it was
as good as throwing our souls away to send us where there were no
priests and churches, we didn’t feel any sorrow when we bid her good-
bye. So we have come away from bad example to get souls that will make
us live as though we had no bodies, for we were very much afraid of
death. The mammatits said the Heracleans lived to make each other happy,
so that each one was loved by all the rest, and in caring for one they
cared for all the rest, so that there could be no grief and repentance
for wrong-doing, for all were good, and cared more for others than
themselves; and we can now see that you are all gladness, and were
sometimes so triste when you were with us. We love father a little more
than we do you, because you see we have always known him, and we haven’t
known you so long. But the gente pequenézas said you were so much
changed in disposition we should hardly know you; and to be sure, now
that we see you when you smile, we feel so glad; and sometimes, when you
lived with us, your smile made us feel sad, as though we’d rather you
would not.”

_Lavoca._ “Yes Lovieta, just think, didn’t his smile at home remind you
of the rose blossoms that look out from the old grated window of the
claustro San Jaun; which seemed for all the world as though they wished
to come out into the sunlight, but couldn’t, because they wouldn’t
confess it was sinful? But they say you never speak cross words here,
for in loving to do so much for others, without money, you have nothing
to scold for. You see we never told mamma all what the Manatitlans could
do to make us good, as they said the priests would persuade her mother
that we had dealings with the devil. Señor Arbitrator, the one that used
to talk with father most, told him all about the schools, and how you
live here. How queer it is that you can hear them talk when you listen
to what they say in your ear, and can scarcely see them on your hand,
let it be ever so clean, for they are very particular. Then their voices
are so very small and chirrupy. But father says, that they are louder in
proportion to size than the cicada’s. Mother was very loving and
cheerful after they came, but very much frightened; then we knew the
gentle pequenézas had talked to her. So you see that we are here with
Annette Pozzuoli, who has come to teach the Heracleans music, which you
said in your letter they are fond of, and we have heard the mammatits
chant their morning and evening songs of praise. Are you really and
truly glad to see us, now that you are so good! Oh dear, what queer
dresses, now that we see them! But how nice, sweet and clean they look!
How very, very, beautiful! Do you think that they will love us if we are
truly good?”

Mr. Welson, with the opportunity assured them that he was truly glad to
see them, as he was certain that they would be loved and happy, and he
was sure that mamma and papa would soon follow the lead of their
affection, and in Heraclea forget that they had ever been unhappy.

The prætor and family had listened unobserved to the prattling relation
of the diminutive maidens, and at its close bestowed upon them the much
coveted caresses, then placing them in charge of Cleorita and Oviata,
who could converse with them in their own language, they were subjected
to the rights of the Kyronese bath, which excited their wincing but
mirthful admiration; and their comfortable contentment was well assured
when they found themselves invested in Heraclean raiment, which
impressed them with the feeling of purified adoption.

After they had been placed in charge of the Kyronese maidens, the
assemblage moved up the avenue toward the city. Mr. Welson, who had
devoted himself to Annette, after his introduction by the children, was
pleased to learn in more direct language the events which had transpired
in Don Pedro’s family, from the period of her return from a visit in the
country, a few days subsequent to his departure on board of the
_Tortuga_. From the description she gave of the children’s thoughtful
endurance and self-dependence during the river voyage, and journey from
Amelcoy, it was evident that they had already entered upon their
novitiate under Manatitlan direction; for they expressed a decided
determination to take care of themselves for the relief of others, and
exhibited so many traits of prudential foresight that they were a help
rather than a burden. At the commencement of the voyage, she said, that
Captain Greenwood and herself had felt great solicitude for the
children, and was half inclined to look upon their exile as an
inexcusable act of indifference on the part of Don Pedro. “But on the
third day, when the poignancy of their grief had become consolable, they
immediately evinced a desire to relieve us from anxiety. With permission
and encouragement they took charge of their own clothes and personal
purity, submitting themselves to our inspection for approval and
direction; and have improved so much in foresight that we have found it
hard to excel them in neatness. As you have seen them this morning, they
have appeared throughout the journey, causing by their example a
constant desire for cleanly renovation on the part of the muleteers, who
were ashamed to appear in negligent garbs, of doubtful purity, to
subject themselves to the reproving contrast. If you remarked their
appearance, you must have observed that they are wonderfully clean and
tidy in their department, and have been unusually attentive in rendering
assistance to all, so that the trip has been one of unalloyed pleasure,
from the exampled influence of the children. When we started from
Amelcoy the captain took Lovieta before him on the saddle-bow, and I
took charge of Lavoca; but on the second day they insisted that they
could ride unsupported on the led mules, and their prudence had so
completely inspired our confidence that they were allowed to make the
trial, with such success that the mules on the fourth day exhibited such
a manifest preference, that jointly with the children they declared
their independence from the arrieros, and have since been recognized by
mules and muleteers as especial favorites.”




                             CHAPTER XXIX.


The process of ablution having been completed, before the sun reached
its meridian, not only the new arrivals, with resident intention, but
the members of the corps, appeared in the lower fora dressed in
Manatitlan costume, which had been prepared for the occasion by the
Heracleans in commemoration of full adoption. The effect produced by the
change can be comprehensively expressed in the whispered announcement of
Lovieta and Lavoca as they regarded with admiring eyes the improvement
made in the _personnel_ of Don Guillermo when raised in his arms for
affectionate congratulation. “Oh! Don Guillermo, you look, and we feel
so nice and light, we could almost fly back to mamma and papa to make
them glad with happiness.” Then pointing to a group of Heraclean matrons
they asked, “Do they ever fly?”

_Don Guillermo._ “Oh yes, in thought to make others happy, they are
always in flight, and it is that which makes you feel so light and
joyous.”

_Lovieta._ “But shall we always feel so good, and grow to be like them?”

_Don G._ “Yes, we are certain that you will, because you are disposed to
be glad for the happiness of others, and measure your desires with the
wish that you may be useful in contributing to the welfare of others for
the return of their affection.”

_Lavoca_ (thoughtfully). “But will it last, Querido Don Guillermo? At
home we were sometimes so glad, and then [sadly] so very, very
miserable.”

_Don G._ “But you see before you those whose examples never change, but
to grow brighter and happier. When you grow more thoughtfully
considerate, you will feel that what you lack in attainment, others
older and more experienced will impart from their affection. Then in
grateful transfer you can assist those more inexperienced than yourself.
Of one thing you can be certain, there will be no Padre Molineros here
to mar your happiness with bead-prayers, exactions, and penances.”

_Lovieta._ “Of course, we can’t now understand all that you wish to have
us know, but we shall try hard to learn, with thought, how to make
others happy, that their love may teach us more than we know ourselves,
so that you can see when you come to visit us that we have neither been
idle or naughty. But now we can’t make much of ourselves, we do so many
things without thinking, and then are sorry after it can’t be helped.
But look, what are they bringing that table with the queer thing on the
end of it, out here for?”

_Don G._ “The instrument that excites your curiosity, enables us to see
and converse with the Manatitlans; but farther than that I am as much in
the dark as you are. We shall soon see, however.”

After a short pause occupied in arranging the tympano-microscope, the
Dosch from the auricular platform said, “According to our custom,
practiced from time immemorial, the sanction of parents in confirmation
of the marriage unity of their children, has been deemed and proved
sufficient for the affectionate realization of unity in fact. But as
your race of enlightened progressives have substituted shadow for
substance, as an act of conformity, in the lack of anointed priestcraft
I have volunteered to act as an officiating sponsor. If the prætor
sanctions my assumption, he can, with his wife, first bestow their
daughters according to our custom, and then I will duplicate the gift
with formulistic rites, so that there can be no question with regard to
the ‘orthodoxy’ of the union.”

To the glad surprise of M. Hollydorf, the parents bestowed Luocuratia to
his keeping, and Correliana to Captain Greenwood’s, in the same breath.
Then, when the sun had entered upon its meridian radius of ascension,
free from shadow, in the still hour of noontide when all nature was
hushed for repose, without inductive explanation, after the prætor had
placed his children in position, Manito and his choristers, in full
chorus chanted the nuptial ceremony with impressive effect, the
Heracleans joining in response.

         “Here beneath the vertical sun,
         Without shadow, you are plighted,
         And with us now, in love are one,
         And forever, ‘soul’ united.

         “With Creative sanction, this, we ever pray,
         May prove your present joy, and immortal stay.
         Hail, glorious noon! these, our notes of love prolong,
         And echo back with joy, this our nuptial song.”

Although arranged by the Dosch and prætor as a surprise, known to all
except the espoused, they quickly, with blissful perception discovered
the intention, and joined with thrillful zest Manito’s choristers, who
made the tympanum reverberate with the following hopeful prophecy and
refrain:—

          “‘Old Lang Syne,’ in bloody record rules the past;
          In the future, love and peace are now forecast.
          Blessings have source, and flow from power Supreme,
          Goodwill to all, now sounds the glorious theme.
          Through the smallest of the human race,
          Was delegated this act of ‘grace.’”

At the close of the marriage ceremony, the Dosch with his family quickly
regained the fossæ of Mr. Welson’s ears, the sinuosities of which were
made to resound with the prophetic responses, causing the eyes of the
owner thereof to turn with an instinctive strabism toward the organ
subject to the impression of Manatitlan vocalism. While his eyes were in
their retroverted position they attracted the attention of Lovieta and
Lavoca, who had recalled their wondering gaze for curious inquiry,
causing them to exclaim in a voice: “O Don Guillermo, what makes you
squint so?” Then, without waiting for an answer, they continued,
glancing at the reflected figures of the Manatitlans in the microscopic
field, “How much larger your little folks are than ours, and how
beautifully they sing.”

But Mr. Welson’s attention was too strongly diverted to give more than
an abstracted answer to his pets. At the close of the prophetic jubilee,
the Dosch answered, from the interpretation of Mr. Welson’s thoughts:
“We do certainly feel, from the docility shown by the leading members of
the corps, as if the wedge of rational thought had opened a passage
through the cycled round of folly for the ejection of the many self-
inflicted causes of misery, which have made life with your race a penal
infliction. The educated substitution of thought for impulsive
impression from the senses, which at present holds ruling sway, would
interpose a shield to prevent the emblematic union of head and tail, for
the vortex extinction of material civilization, and degradation for the
reënactment of savage barbarism through a long series of dark ages.
There is certainly a happy forecast inaugurated by this union, which
reminds us of our provincial success in raising human Animalculans to
become in reality Animalcumans; a distinction which our neophytes are
emulous of having conferred from self-approving merit. If it was not for
the selfish fighting disposition of Christian nations and sects, which
inclines them to instinctive patriotism and holy wars, advantage might
be taken of their superstitious reverence for things ancient, to attract
them hitherward as pilgrims, for their own behoof.”

Here the ears of the Dosch caught the subdued tones of familiar voices,
which from their peculiar method of construing terms he quickly
recognized, causing him to expostulate in this wise: “I hear the voices
of your old sailor companions, Jack and Bill; is it fitting that their
honest sincerity should alone be welcomed by their Kyronese admirers? If
their quaint, unsophisticated bluntness has been able to recognize the
truthful simplicity of Heraclean example, it will prove a greater
acquisition for the encouragement of hope than your own; as they
represent a class embalmed with the stupidity of erratic animal
indulgence, which subjects them to the vilest servitude ever imposed by
the arbitrary few upon the unthinking masses of humanity. Indeed, with
the exception of the self-imposed penalties of your Giga women’s vanity,
they suffer more abjectly from the fiat of hereditary usage than the
veriest slave that ever winced under the lash of the taskmaster.”

Mr. Welson and Dow soon added a glow of grateful contentment to the
weather-beaten faces of the two sailors, by extending to them a cordial
welcome, which was increased to manifestations of “weakness,” from the
warmth of the Heracleans’ affectionate reception. There was something so
uniquely attractive in the instinctive attachment of these strange
beings, who had wandered away from their element, that they had enlisted
a strong interest long before the possible existence of a human
Animalcuman had been conjectured; or an idea of the practicability of a
preferred affection had been suggested, in exaltation above the
instinctive type rendered “famous” by the fabled “friendship” of the
legendary Damon and Pythias. Mr. Welson had tested the fealty of their
attachment in a variety of ways on board of the _Tortuga_, with a
constant result in confirmation of its disinterested integrity.

Finding themselves the centre of attraction, which was seasoned with
manifold tokens of affectionate sincerity, they were fain to have
recourse to their “pocket-swabs, to clear the leakage from the run on
scuppers of their eyes,” with an occasional sounding of their nostril
pumps, to divert the emotional overflow from its natural course.
Correliana, in a transparent glow of radiant joy, for the relief of
their “filling condition, that water-logged” the speech of the “honest
tars,” asked Jack in good English, if he did not prefer his present
success in “drawing fire,” to the method he adopted with the Indians?
The question produced a sudden revulsion, which Bill seconded with a
nudge and a whisper, that could have been heard in a gale: “Say, Jack,
her leddyship had you there with the pint of a marlin.”

Taken aback, Jack gave a short, subdued hitch to his waistband and
mouth, and then replied, with the latter reefed into a smile: “You see,
m’rm, your leddyship, w’re now on a peaceful tack, for w’ve come to sign
the articles and enter our name as landsmen, if he cares to ship us at a
venture, and take us in tow for the v’yage of life, and mayhap for t’
other.” Then hesitating, to gather courage, which was gained by an extra
hitch of his waistband, he resumed: “You see, m’rm, if so be your father
would ‘low us to splice, we’d like to port our helm in Heraclea for
life.”

Understanding the tenor of the sailor’s petition, by the fond glances
exchanged by himself and mate, with the two Kyronese maidens, who had
attended upon them while acting as guards or gate-keepers, she addressed
the Dosch in Latin, asking if it was agreeable to his judgment to have
their request complied with; pleading her own assurance of their
constancy from the disinterested affection they had shown toward each
other. The Dosch not only expressed his full approbation, but desire
that they should be immediately united. This decision receiving the
prætor’s sanction, and willing approval of the maiden’s parents, and,
above all, the blushing self-bestowal of the affiants, whose
inclinations were consulted by Cleorita and Oviata, it was resolved to
consummate the union at once, if the sun had not declined in its arc
sufficient for the casting of a shadow. Placing them in position as
quickly as possible, it was found that, with haste, the emblematic
ceremony could be accomplished in a union without shadow. But when the
sailors were asked for their family names, it was found that from long
habit in using only their “Christian” names in addressing each other,
they were at a loss in deciding to which of the surnames, Smith or
Jones, they were personally entitled from parental endowment, although
aware that one or the other had been inherited as a nominal adjunct to
Jack and Bill. As they could not recollect to which they were separately
entitled, the Dosch, from the urgency of the emergency, was fain to
accept the only alternative of the dilemma, and in the formulistic
style, peculiar to Giga understanding, consummated the ties by
propounding: “You, Bill Smith or Jones, in mutual troth do plight your
vows in constancy for life to Anonymosimia Doycymba, and you, Jack Jones
or Smith, yours to Meerisia Abdosia?”

The hearty “aye, aye, sir” of the male respondents, and the softer
modulated, but firmly expressed “ai toi” of dames Jones or Smith, closed
the involved nomenclature of the ceremony. The Dosch remarked, after
regaining the ear of Mr. Welson, that although the courtship had been
conducted in the entire absence of an understanding speech
communication, their auramentors were fully assured that there existed a
stronger instinctive attachment, in nearer approach to an independence
from bodily influence, than is usually attained by civilized
reciprocants from the advantage of a common language, inasmuch as it
restrained the tongue from its “yarned” propensity for exaggeration,
peculiar to its use with sailors, and the more decided truthful negation
by the votaries of fashionable society. The assembly, at the conclusion
of the second improvised marriage scene, joined in the recitative
invocation and song of thanksgiving sub-transcribed:—

               “In gladness we to our Creator raise
               This grateful song, in everlasting praise,
               That through Manatitla’s atomic life
               He has ope’d a way to end human strife,
               That in ‘wedlock,’ domestic joy
               Shall brighter glow and never cloy.”

At the close of the hymn of invocation the Dosch dictated the advisory
sanction adopted by the Manatitlans, which we give as rendered by the
prætor: “In the full belief of your loving sincerity, we joyfully
confirm this union with that of our children, hopefully believing that
your affection will increase in fervor until death relieves you of your
bodies’ encumbrance for the full consummation of a joyous immortality.”

The buzz and genealogical curators of sound were highly delighted with
the harmony of the musical composition, declaring that its peculiar
adaptation attested to the affectionate talent of a master spirit. The
former, in enthusiastic approval, offered his warmest commendations to
Manito, the Maniculan prætor; at the same time congratulating the
Manatitlans in having possession of a musician of such eminent ability.
Great was his chagrin and surprise, when Manito not only disclaimed the
authorship, but stated that the merit of the poetical composition and
musical adaptation belonged solely to his pupil, Mistress Correliana, of
whose advancement and talent he was justly proud. The perturbed
expression of Pettynose bespoke the revived memory of his former
criticism, causing the padre to chuckle audibly from the recollection of
the dogmatic snap he had received, when his suggested variation had
abruptly closed the dulcetina improvisation. The blushing attention of
Correliana was too much absorbed with the admiring surprise of her
husband to heed the professor’s confusion. In explanation to him, she
whispered that Manito had taught her how to use the dulcetina with the
aid of the tympano-microscope, unbeknown to the members of the corps,
and had also instructed her in the art of composition. Captain Greenwood
had a strong passion for music, without vocal capacity for its
expression. To compensate for his own deficiency, it had been his
abiding desire to possess a wife with the talent he lacked, that she
might impart its sympathetic solace for the relief of anxious care. This
desire Correliana had intuitively discovered, which added a strong
incentive for application, with the purpose of imparting her improvement
to her people.

After the marriage confirmation by the prætor, Manito, through Mr.
Welson, proposed to adjourn from the fora to the auriculum. On the way
the Dosch passed to the ear of Captain Greenwood; his salutation caused
a sudden start, with the motion of raising his hand, which Correliana
detained; aware of the cause from the divergence of his eyes, she asked:
“Do you recognize the voice of an old familiar?”

Her husband’s puzzled expression declared the nature of the
communication, aside from his voiced expression as if in repetition,
“Annette, harp, violin, dulcetina!” Correliana added to the sum of his
perplexity by asking if the young woman having Don Pedro’s children in
charge was the sole survivor of the unfortunates who received his
assisting sympathy while in the extremity of their distress in Rio?
Startled by a question that implied her knowledge of a secret which he
supposed was only known to Annette and himself, he answered,
inquiringly, “Yes?” Receiving from his wife a fond kiss of benediction,
she asked: “Do you wonder that I discovered the source that gained you
Manatitlan approval, with an affection so fearless in its sympathy while
imparting its succoring rays of goodness? You wonder at my ready
acquisition of your language and the source of my information? Do you
suppose, with an innate perception of the unselfish sympathy which
prompted you to solace the sufferings of those forlorn beings, who had
afforded me protection at the cost of their kinsfolk’s lives, that I
could remain content without perfecting myself for the full enjoyment of
a languaged communion with your thoughts? The voice that startled your
memory, was the prompting familiar’s, who attended you in Rio through
the sad scenes, that in termination bequeathed the harp, violin, and
dulcetina, as mementos to stimulate your unselfish affection for the
devisement of means for the future relief of your race from the cause of
such calamitous hereditaments.”

Tears glistened in the eyes of her husband as her loving sympathy
brought back with graphic effect the scenes indelibly impressed upon his
memory. Recovering from his emotions, he beckoned to Annette, who,
attended by Mr. Welson, had held herself aloof from the newly wedded;
quickly answering to his signal, she was introduced to his wife, who
bestowed upon her a warm embrace as a prelude to more affectionate
communion. Then in answer to his desire to listen in judgment of her
proficiency, Cleorita and Oviata volunteered their service with Kyronese
aids to bring the dulcetina, harp, and violin from the hospidoræ. When
the harp was attuned to the dulcetina, Annette, with ready ear and touch
improvised an accompaniment to the simple air of an anthem of
Correliana’s composition, at the same time watching her supposed self-
taught success in the management of her father’s instrumental
conception. From the first Annette’s pleasure became manifest, for
Correliana retained the tenor of her composition independent of the
harp. At the close of the instrumental duo, Annette highly commended her
proficiency, giving her the desired assurance of capability for the
attainment of unusual skill, both in vocal and instrumental music.
Annette’s skillful instrumentation and melodious vocalization caused Dr.
Baāhar to observe, naturalistically, that there was a sensible
diminution in the length of the buzz and genealogical curators of
sound’s musical horns. The prætor Manito was in ecstasies with the
successful rendition of his pupil, and declared to his wife his
intention of extending to Annette a kiss of welcome, out of his
abounding love for her musical talent. Disappearing from our Giga eyes
on the instant, but not from those of his wife, whose face mantled with
a blush when she saw him in the very act of imprinting a kiss upon her
lips, the recipient, with a vague impression, raised her hand and
brushed it away. The Dosch remarking the effect produced upon Manito’s
wife, said, that it was an apt illustration of jealousy, for it never
considered the relative disproportion of the exciting objects. Manito’s
next appearance upon the stage was under the lead of his wife’s thumb
and forefinger, attached to his ear, while with assumed tartness, in
strong Giga accent, she upbraided him for the impudent infidelity of the
act. But her curiosity getting the better of her assumed indifference,
she tauntingly exclaimed, “I suppose you found the unreciprocated stolen
kiss from a single Giga lip more than equal in sweetness to two of ours
prompted by conscious affection?” Slipping from her finger’s hold, he
gave the flying answer: “Yes, truly, I found her lip as full in volume
as the tones of her voice!”

Lovieta and Lavoca, who had witnessed this playful episode, whisperingly
asked Mr. Welson: “Are these large ones related to the ear Manatitlans,
and will they grow larger when they grow older?” But as his answer
failed to satisfy their comprehension, they asked him, if they looked as
pretty as the Manatitlans now that they were dressed like them? A
caressing hand upon their heads proving a satisfactory reply, they
declared it a _moda linda, facil, y agradable a la vista_, and in the
Heraclean school, so nicely clothed, they felt sure that they should
become good, graciosa, and would try to be as affectionate as the
brides! In benediction, for the success of their good intentions, Mr.
Welson bestowed commendatory kisses, and again placed them in charge of
Cleorita and Oviata.

Anxious to read his letters, he, with the Dosch, retired to the quarters
of the corps. After glancing at his formulistic letters of “friendship”
and business,—which were closely interwoven,—under the supervision of
the Dosch, who kept up a running commentary, in which he pointed out the
prospective selfishness of each correspondent, in a manner so legible,
their insincerity became so disgusting to the receiver that he laid them
aside, wondering how he had allowed himself to be beguiled for a
lifetime with such shadowy pretexts. The letter of Don Pedro Garcia,
which he had reserved for the last, revived his hopeful trust in the
latent goodness of humanity. We offer its chapter transcript for the
benefit of the reader.




                              CHAPTER XXX.


                                     BUENOS AYRES, _November 5th, 187-_.

DEAR DON GUILLERMO: You will be very much surprised, notwithstanding the
forewarning of intention, to find yourself unexpectedly greeted in
Heraclea by your little favorites Lovieta and Lavoca. It has cost us a
painful struggle to part with them; but we should have been unmindful of
our privilege and duty as conservators for their future welfare, in
joyous transmission, if we had consulted the disposition of our selfish
feelings. Even if our household was of the most suitable description
known to civilization for rearing children, I should not have hesitated
a moment in imploring your influence for their admission into the
Heraclean school. Consolata, with unprejudiced consideration, fully
appreciates the advantages of the protective course, for conferring
present and future happiness.

Realmente, the evidence appeals so directly to the affectionate
understanding, the niñas fully comprehend the advantages that it will
afford, which in thoughtful mood they expressed, by asking us if we did
not think the Manatitlans and Heracleans from having such nice parents
for so long a time were better than good? I am free to confess that I
felt a wince at the touch palpable the question conveyed; tears
glistened in the eyes of Consolata, as she enfolded the unconscious
challengers in her arms, with a languaged embrace that impressed them
with affirmative conviction, while it imparted a desire for their
forgiveness, which trebly admonished me of my own unworthiness. It is
strange how little use we now have for voiced words to give expression
to our thoughts. This silent source of happy intercourse bespeaks with
increasing flow our current perception of a joyous unity in affection,
including in its circle of communion M. Baudois and our neighborly
confluents. In our morning and evening walks for the exampled
demonstration of happy regeneration, that in practice its source may be
made known to others, reflections from objects are so similar in
impression that a glance is sufficient for the conveyance of coincident
thought comparisons. Last evening, while on our way to visit the
“industrial” establishments of our foreign “citizens” (by invitation),
who are constantly begging for governmental concessions for the
encouragement of their enterprising “undertakings,” we passed many of
our black priestly scentipedes, and it was with conscious emotions of
joy that I felt the confiding pressure of Consolata’s arm, as she
averted her face to avoid the necessity of hypocritical salutation. As
my governmental position had evoked from Mr. Hogg an invitation to visit
his distillery, I proposed to M. Baudois the advisability of taking the
family, that we might observe the effect produced by the improvements,
upon my wife and children. With his approval they were taken; and while
we were cautiously picking our path along the causeway crossing of the
slough that separates the brewery premises of Von Guzzledorf from those
of the distillery, Mr. Hogg, in his obsequious desire to honor our visit
with propitious attention, hastened to meet us with his ponderous body
and jowled cheeks and neck in jellied tremor from the emotions of a
waddling gait, in gloat of the expectant relish of selfish
gratification. After a wheezing prelude, with a cough that in fitful
gusts conveyed the foul odors of gamey engorgement, he lamented his
asthmatic affliction, that refused to yield to remedies, although he had
spared no expense to avail himself of the best talent that could be
secured for “love” or money. But recently, he said, he had obtained
great relief from the prescriptions of Dr. Bull, a member of the royal
college of surgeons, who had recently come out from London, at his
instigation; a man of eminent ability who had gained a great reputation
for his prophylactic pills, a box of which every family should keep in
their house, to be taken regular every morning. While engaged in this
preliminary detail of health and its providential means of preservation,
Lovieta and Lavoca with ill suppressed disdainful sniffs of comparison,
allowed their eyes to alternate between his person and a family of his
namesake’s, who, with a strong personal resemblance and odor, were
indulging in the luxurious contributions from the neighboring brewery
and kindred establishments bordering upon the slough.

Our visits to the distillery and brewery were certainly not propitious
for securing the desired grant of land, for the enlargement of their
industrial facilities, notwithstanding the sacrificial offering of a box
of Wolf’s Scheidam Schnapps and a dozen of old London Dock Sherry, of
1824. When leaving, Mr. Hogg begged me for the welfare of myself and
family, not to forget that Dr. Bull was for the present stopping at the
Hotel del Mundo. On our return home, a bath was held in requisition for
purification from the attaint of the visit. Under these contrasted
impressions, our thoughts have withheld us from instinctive
gratification by the force of repulsive comparison. Of course, our
singularity has evoked the despiteful recognition of the evil disposed,
but we feel an enduring recompense in the loving reciprocations of our
household; for we no longer suffer from those transitions which of old
subjected us in a day to mutations, that realized within the zones of
affection, tropical heats, with terror motor accompaniments of tornado,
thunder gusts, and intermediate alternations to the frosty stillness of
the frigid.

With realized happiness, we are encouraged with the approving
commendations of our Manatitlan sojourners to believe that a perfect
eradication of the parental past will be accomplished in the memories of
our children, under Heraclean tuition, for in the change they already
recognize the happy cause. When a sufficient time has elapsed for the
fulfillment of an end so desirable, we shall, with the prætor’s
permission, make Heraclea our permanent home. Then, with the privilege
of monthly visits to our daughters, we shall enter upon an era of
happiness that we feel assured will outlast the records of time; for we
have already tested the efficacy of purity and goodness, in sufficient
degree for an initial impression of immortality. In companionship with
you and the members of the corps, under the direction of the Dosch, and
the example of the Heracleans, I shall endeavor to amend my own
crotchety humors, which, if we except the superstitious devotion of
instinct to rites and ceremonies, and herding predilections, are in no
great degree above those I affect to despise, in the matter of
stability. But I am fully impressed with the belief, that Creative
wisdom devised purity and goodness, as the simple creed of self
legislation and approving test of immortality.

I will now offer for your remorseful consideration, a counterblast. Have
you reflected upon the responsibility you have incurred in leading us
astray from the glorious system of rewards and punishments offered for
the encouragement and correction of indulgences, by the “good” old
mother church? Why did you not leave us in ignorance of the audacious
Manatitlan system of education, that dares usurp with self legislation
the infallible promulgations of law and gospel for the correction of
excessive indulgences. The substitution of direct responsibility for
salvation by saving grace, deprives instinctive humanity of its barter
privilege of using the gold of its god as a compromising compensation
for indulgence, and the consolations of confession and absolution,
causing us, especially, to hold them in extreme contempt as subterfuges
begot from the vileness of hereditary cause and effect. The instinctive
reverence we once paid to priestly mediums of heavenly assurance against
the devices of hell, you have turned into the bitterness of shame, from
the reflection of past humiliation imposed by their impudent assumptions
of delegated divine authority.

Our present feeling of responsibility for perfection in purity and
goodness, revolts at the thought that our perceptions were ever so weak
as to believe there ever existed in the pampered bodies of priests,
other than a swinish divinity endowed with an instinctive audacity that
prefers deception to honest labor. We now avoid church and street
mummeries of host processions and masses, as a profanation of good
instinctive common sense, as our presence would implicate us in the
blasphemous degradation. To our chance acquaintance with you, fostered
with affectionate sympathy, I must charge this defection, also the
retrospective pangs of shame engendered from sensitive regrets for my
stupidity, which suffers from revival with every rattling peal of church
bells. Not content with casting these heretical shadows across our path,
you have devised to rob us of our niñas, our abiding source of love.
Bethink you of the accountability you have incurred, with your chances
of self-forgiveness.

With a falcon script in acknowledgment we shall feel assured that you
will bestow upon our niñétas a father’s care and love.... P. G.

                  *       *       *       *       *

Mr. Welson joyfully exclaimed, as he closed the letter, “It is really
reviving to hope, to hear a provincial, of Spanish descent, express
himself with such perceptive clearness, in freedom from the thraldom of
sensual embargo, which has rendered our race the phantasmal victims of
stomach indulgence, from time out of date!”

The Dosch, in confirmation of Mr. Welson’s train of thought, urged, “It
has required our utmost efforts to hold our feelings of contempt subdued
that they might not altogether usurp the rule of discreet generosity, in
view of the obstinate stupidity of civilized Giga races; who, with star
gazing, and moon conjectures, forget their preservative accountability
to Creative indications designed for the attainment of a living
realization of immortality. How it has been possible for the races of
civilized humanity to exist in individual communion with self, and the
advantage it affords for deductive comparison, aside from the mutations
of attrition, through so many cycles of re-degradation, without
discovering the active cause and remedial source, puzzles our
comprehension. The ridiculous abstractions of your philosophers, which
in thoughtless aberration leads them to lose the substance while
pursuing the shadow, was aptly illustrated by some of our frolicsome
dames, who decoyed Dr. Baāhar, in successful test of his lack of
discernment, to follow the shadow, more vehemently, from its supposed
evasions, than he had previously bestowed upon the gossamer substance of
a butterfly. While amusing themselves with a morning volant airing upon
a beautiful azure-tinted specimen of the L. Matutinal in its wafting
sips from the flowers of the latifundium, it caught the covetous gaze of
the doctor, who was on his way with his net for a hunt beyond the walls.
After pursuing its doubling variations in flight, which from graceful
composure seemed void of evasive intention, to the verge of vexatious
anxiety, while his back was to the sun, it suddenly soared, substituting
its shadow, which the dames made still more attractive by prismatic
colors rayed from their silicoth mantles. His efforts grew more frantic
from the apparently miraculous escape of the coveted prize through the
meshes of the net; which caused the infatuated pursuer to suppose that
its illusive power indicated a new species. To our surprise the illusive
chase continued with increased avidity as the prismatic colors were
varied, the shadow being kept just in advance of the net’s swoop, until
after an hour’s pursuit, the excited naturalist fell exhausted upon his
knees in the formulistic attitude of prayer. In this position, with
upraised eyes and hands, he watched imploringly the lessening shadow of
his morning’s devotions. Although surrounded with evidences, which
should have led to an impulsive detection of the cause of the
tantalizing movements, previous to substitution, there never was for a
moment the least hesitation that indicated suspicion or doubt of the
limn’s substance reality.”

In character, nothing has surprised us more than the insensibility of
Gigas, who claim the disciplined aid of collegiate education, to the
effects evolved from their own experience. Yet, notwithstanding the
contempt you personally feel for the selfish enactments of your past
life, your relapse, in partial degree, would not appear strange if
subjected to reversed example. But with the Heracleans, from hereditary
usage the impression has become immutable. The contrast will lead you to
realize the great difficulties that will attend the inceptive stages
required for reversing the progressive position of your people; as they
have been accustomed to advance with their backs to the future from time
immemorial, the change will prove embarrassing for many generations.
These contrasted facts, which expose in extremity the habits of usage,
with the inveteracy incurred for good or evil, has caused us to view the
act of self-denial on the part of the parents of your pets, as a
trustful deviation that exceeds any in our former experience, and it
will certainly insure a harmonious transmission. If the mother’s
affection had been void of delusive infatuation, permitting her to act
in accordance with the promptings of its natural expression, the
devisement of the children to the Heraclean school would not have
appeared strange, as unprejudiced by delusive agency and its evil
tendencies the love of maternity extends to the future. In
exemplification of the evil tendencies of your delusive legendary book
of creeds, that has defied the efforts of ninety-five thousand human
commentators to render it comprehensible, with accumulating legions of
preaching expounders, I will relate an event that transpired during the
inceptive period of my auramental labors.

The dramatis personæ in the triangular scriptural duel I am about to
relate, for exemplifying the utter perversion of intelligent affection,
wrought by this precedental tramway to discord, were in scenic
representation, a grandmother of Scotch extraction, derived from the
amiable clan McGregor, her daughter, and granddaughter, who in
passionate exacerbation occupied counter positions in domestic
antagonism. The _locale_ of the scenic enactment, for your more perfect
understanding of its mouthpat _entente cordiale_, we will award to
Londonderry, Ireland. Having, by a strange fatality peculiar to
auramentation in youth, been led by diverse circumstances to become a
member of the household, I was forced to witness the repulsive drama in
all the progressive stages to culmination. When in the morning
avocations the three “fell out” to disagree, from a flux of hereditary
passion, they would exhaust their store of word provocations, and then
have recourse to prayer, after the mid-mother had read a formal
challenge from the creed “omnium gatherum.” These formulistic rites
concluded, and the male members dispersed to their employments foreign
to the house, the three antagonists would enter the “sitting-room” to
decide their quarrel, each taking a corner of the room with their book
of missals in hand. With the room appropriately darkened, they would
each, with hasty avidity, hurriedly search for some virulent passage of
“scripture” of innuendic import, and when found it would be hurled in
venomous recital against her adversaries. Often the voices of the three
would be intermingled in the combined discharge of offensive
similitudes, each vying in the melée encounter for ascendancy in
loudness of report, and precision in the diabolic aim of their
denunciations. Slight wounds, of Jezabelic imputation, were borne
heroically, but the grandam of eighty when severely hurt by thrusts into
old wounds rankling with the personal reflection of her accountability
for whatever was amiss from lack of amiability in the tempers of
daughter and granddaughter, would seize her plaid, and, in defiance of
weather, would seek an asylum in the house of her son, distant two miles
from the scene of action. The flight of the grandam would add new vigor
to the vituperative discharge of invective quotation between mother and
daughter, which generally resulted in a drawn battle, leaving the
envenomed cause to smoulder in belligerent tendency, until their
magazines were replenished with holy war munitions, sufficient for the
adventure of another trial of anathematizing strength. When one of these
encounters had proved fatal to the grandam, from a severe cold caught
from wading through the snaw broo in her retreat from the battle-field,
her grandsons invoked from day the fall of darkness, to stay the
portended renewal of hostilities, in opposition to the commands of
Joshua, but coincident with the prayer of the modern battle hero of
Waterloo, for Blucher or night. These belligerent domestic
inconsistencies incited by creed incongruities, and indigestible food,
and lack of bodily exercise, are by no means rare among the civilized
peoples of the old and new world. As with the Scotch, singed sheep’s
head, haggis, and whiskey, were the inciting cause of religious
intolerance and border warfare, it will be found that like causes rule
as a source of provocation for distempered aberrations of every kind.

“We will now seek your infantile protégés, and see how it fares with the
newly united.”

“First resolve me of my doubts with regard to your consistency,” urged
Mr. Welson. “How do you reconcile the hasty unions you have sanctioned,
with your ‘invariable custom,’ that requires three months probationary
test of compatibility before the full consummation of unity.”

“You should be aware of a distinction that it would be impossible for us
to reconcile in your marriage adoption,” replied the Dosch. “You are
strangers to our system of education, so that we are obliged to accept
an alternative for your tests; as you must realize that the quarantine
of a lifetime would not render you compatible according to our
acceptation. But nominally all have complied with the probationary
requirements; even M. Hollydorf, as Correliana proxied her twin sister.
Still our chief dependence is in the incomparable beauty and goodness of
the bride, which will render disagreement impossible. But I perceive
that you have still another indigestible example that you would have
reconciled. We have claimed that our ‘system’ of education renders the
unity of affection between the marriage affiants indivisible; yet in
seeming contradiction, your thoughts refer to the second marriage of the
prætor with Correliana’s mother. We could have explained to you this
apparent discrepancy, but for our wish that you might discover from the
promptings of your own perception the admissibility of an association
designed for mutual solace and companionship in bodily representation.
The prætor Adinope when premonized of death’s approach, preferred the
tribune Adestus, who had lost his wife, to the prætorship, as the chosen
companion of his wife, under the temporal privilege of correlative
correspondence in the body. With the dying prætor’s sanction, Adestus
assumed the charge of the household and prætorial advisorship while the
husband yet lived. You have in thought questioned this as an impeachment
of the unity we profess in the assimilative fulfillment of our first
affection. But I can assure you there is neither divorce or abatement in
the troth unity of the first allegiance. In fact, they become more
perfectly wedded in thought with those who have preceded them to the
current realms of immortality; and in vicarious communion, commend
without stint or prevarication the ever present manifestations they
enjoy with their beatific spouses, and longings for the speedy
consummation of a disembodied reunion. If Heraclea could furnish wives
for Giga representatives, as well endowed with reason and as free from
prejudicial taint as you are, the labor of educational induction in its
inceptive stage would soon be accomplished. For in wifely Heraclean
example, the joyous brightness would be reflected with such purity that
it would irresistibly attract assimilative reciprocation, in thought,
from all within reach of its influence, causing vanity, with its
promptings for adornment, to become an exile beyond the reach of
material redemption. With the current of your women’s affections once
emancipated from the shallows of personal ornamentation, the clear depth
of the stream would purify itself from the undertow of man’s grosser
instincts, casting the refuse of precedental habits and customs back
upon themselves, and the cycle shores of the past, with their memorial
odors of instinctive corruption.”

_Mr. Welson._ “As you have answered these problems, which opposed
themselves to our understandings, as stumbling blocks preventing our
full appreciation of your wisdom’s infallibility, in a manner so
practically agreeable, will you apprise me of the method you propose for
reducing the appetites and passions of Giga humanity to an initial
accord with the Heraclean standard? This request I proffer under the
privilege conferred by your maxim, ‘that we should never cavil or
criticise without being practically able to amend.’”

_Dosch._ “Although our maxim in application to your race lacks, or has
hitherto lacked, the secondary power of example required for practical
efficiency, we will answer your inquiry by holding your example as our
prospective means of introduction. As an initiatory step for reciprocal
purification, in prefatory advisement for the introduction of our
protective system of education, and its inauguration of self-control and
legislation, we shall auramentally propose an international dietary
congress, for the studied adaptation of food in quality and quantity,
for the healthy requirements of the body. With this as a basis for
thought direction, we shall propose a method for the inductive
substitution of a common language, free from sectional prejudices, by
the introduction of international schools, kindred to our own, which in
hostage reciprocation will eradicate the seeds of instinctive jealousy.
Husband and wife are to be held as a unity for representative expression
in congress; with the special proviso that the voice of the man shall
alone bespeak the unity of intention in public assembly. Under the
ruling of the dietary congress, stomach codes could be established for
the mouth rejection of all indigestible and incompatible compounds, in
solid or liquid form. This would emancipate the stomach from the
arbitrary tyranny of individual hodge-podgery, relieving the body and
brain from the incubus imposed by the unreason of ages. The prestige of
a single generation’s restful rendering of these intuitive examples of
reason would result in the utter abolishment of such songs as the ‘Watch
on the Rhine,’ so characteristic in guttural expression of the
indigestible philosophy of a German diet, and the more musical, battle-
inspiring Marsellaise, instinct with the lighter French national régime,
suited to the Zouave accompaniment of ‘Leap on, leap on!’ while in
substitution there would arise blendings of song, and salutations
replete with joyful gladness in the new-fledged accents of affectionate
reciprocations. This innovation would effectually liberate the German
language from the bondage of nose and stomach, and the French from the
frothy sibilations of vanity, causing them to harmonize in peaceful
goodwill, with contributions from every tongue, until special idiomatism
would become involved in the sympathy of universal accord.”

The discourse of the Dosch was here interrupted by the voices of Lovieta
and Lavoca, calling for Don Guillermo, who gave an answering invitation
for them to come in and see where he lived. This brought them to his
knees in full chorus for the rehearsal of the marvelous impressions they
had received. But in the rapid scan their eyes gave to the alcoved
apartment they caught a view of the Dosch and Doschessa, with other
Manatitlans reflected in the field of the table tympano-microscope,
which hushed their voiced exuberance into regardful silence. The Dosch,
after watching for a few moments their curious awe, reminded Mr. Welson
that his wife was specially anxious for a personal introduction to his
children in trust. This given, the Doschessa soon won their confidence,
and imparted to the eager germ of Giga curiosity some of the winning
traits of affectionate reciprocation encouraged in the Manatitlan
schools for the enlightenment of thought perception. Her success was
soon evident from the gathering mists that sparkled in rayed mementos of
affection from their eyelashes to be resolved into tears, as an
accompaniment to the plaintive vocals, “mamma, papa.” As the dew of
inborn memories yielded to soothing direction, natural affection
expanded, until it included, with the “extreme unction” of goodness, the
infantile query of possibility for the redemption of Padre Molinero from
self. In questioning expression, from the impressions of memory, they
asked with a toddling perception of cause and effect, if it would not
change him if he ate and drank less, so that his mouth would not make a
noise so porcuno? Then, as if in thought consultation tracing the effect
of renovation, they asked if a priest could be made as loving and
respectable as Mr. Welson and Captain Greenwood by removing his hat,
gown, and fat?

The Dosch laughingly replied, that if he and his kind would adopt the
first restrictions mentioned, it would certainly indicate a desire to
become respectable in self-estimation, and show a disposition to merit
the confidence of others.

When well ingratiated in their affection, the Doschessa asked by what
token they wished to be made sensible of her watchful care? This seemed
to puzzle their ingenuity for the devisement of a tangible method of
communication. But Lavoca, after demure consideration, said, that she
thought it would be easy to kiss and embrace, if she could manage to
continue as large as she then appeared.

The Dosch then explained to their ready comprehension, that their
reflection in the field of the microscope was like the vanity of
personal adornment shadowed in a mirror, which when removed left nothing
but its vague impression for the delusive gratification of self. But the
Doschessa said, if they wished to retain a lasting impression of her as
she then appeared, they must keep themselves free from passion by
bestowing their thoughts upon others; then she would be ever present
with them to be kissed and embraced in thought, which was a reality that
with goodness would last forever. They promised that they would always
try to be good, but hoped if they sometimes forgot, she and the teachers
would forgive, and let them try again. “Because,” Lavoca urged, “our
people have not been good like yours, and we haven’t learned how to be
always the same.” She assured them, that with all their disadvantages,
if they tried to make their associates and teachers happy, they would
forget their own selfishness, and feel that the merited affection of
others would always make them joyous with gladness. Perceiving that they
were still anxious in thought for an intuitive token of her affection
conveyed in the language of a kiss, she proposed to comply with their
wish, but cautioned them to be gentle in their reciprocation when they
felt her pressure upon their lips. First to Lovieta, and then with an
ear premonition to the more impetuous Lavoca, she imparted the loving
thrill that ever attends the reciprocal blending of instinctive sense
with the animus of goodness. Both were exultant in declaring that her
kiss, although exceedingly small and tiny in its touch, was larger in
making them feel more happy everywhere than any they had ever felt of
their own kind, and were certain they should know whenever they were
kissed by a Manatitlan. After this happy introduction of the novecetas
to the Manatitlans, the Dosch and Doschessa accepted Mr. Welson’s
invitation, and occupied their accustomed seats on the tragus of his
ear; and then with the escort of Cleorita, Oviata, Lovieta, and Lavoca,
started in search of the newly unionized, who were found enjoying the
cool shade of the tamarisks on the terraced descent from the summit to
the basin of the falls.

The Dosch, while the presence of Mr. Welson’s party was yet
undiscovered, called his attention to the unity of expression exhibited
by their faces as they gazed in thoughtfully silent meditation upon the
fantastic sprays of falling water, whose misty vapor, bearing perennial
freshness in dispersion to air and vegetation, represented in similitude
their own thoughtful desires for the extension of their glad happiness
to others. Mr. Welson’s face became subject to regretful shadows, as he
passed in review the instinctive follies recalled to his memory in
contrast by the constantly recurring variations in manifestation of the
happy influence transmitted from hereditary self legislation. In thought
he expressed thankful praise that his life had been spared to witness
scenes which in truthful representation realized more of bliss than had
ever entered into his most sanguine conceptions. In thoughtful
admiration of the unionized beatitude expressed in the silent flow of
current reciprocations, stimulated by the stentorian promptings of the
Dosch in the lulls of the wind waft, he resolved to avail himself,
without delay, of an example so pregnant with current joy. With
lingering desire he motioned away his escort, then withdrawing himself
without disturbing the mystic harmony of the wafting ingraft of
affection, he sought within himself for an assurance of hopes that had
surprised him while visiting the school for nynetas.

At the descending junction of the avenue with those of the basin and
incrematium he met the prætor and his wife, who were accustomed on the
occasion of a marriage to visit its sweet scented groves for communion
with their current selves in purification from the body’s probation.
They were quick to detect in the subdued but hopefully eloquent
expression of Mr. Welson’s face, an undefined longing, and were not
surprised when he unburthened to them his desire for their censorial
consultation, and judgment after an explanatory intercession with the
object of his premised thoughtful affection. With warm commendations in
support of the wisdom of his choice, from her special adaptability, they
immediately entered upon the eliminary negotiations required for a
verdict of relief; the result of which will be detailed in a subsequent
chapter.




                             CHAPTER XXXI.


Cleorita and Oviata, with intuitive susceptibility, detected the new
phase of attraction to which Mr. Welson had become subject, and assumed
the entertainment of his adopted children until evening song, although
they were inclined to hold padre carita in attendance on the plea that
they should not see him from to-morrow for a whole month. With the
canopied shadows cast by the sun’s decline over the city, the eyes of
Lovieta and Lavoca, under the reactive weight of unusual excitement,
began to flicker, and they were dismissed to their beds while expressing
in drowsy accents the happiness they anticipated from the warmth of
their adoption by the niñétas de escuela. The twilight chirps of the
suffragian court sparrows from trellis-vine perches, in preparation for
their song of praise, had scarce betokened the break of day, before
Cleorita and Oviata aroused with fondlings their nycephas from their
deep sleep into the dreamful slumbers that precede with herald prelude
the instinctive mood of ruling impression. While yet hovering with
suspended wings in the balance of sleeping and waking impressions,
conscious affection murmured in pleading accents, “Mamma, papa, poco mas
suéño?” But with the renewal of the rosy salutations, the waking
twilight of perception began to dawn, and then, with the first sunlight
rays of memory, their eyes quickly opened to receive the fond greetings
of the Kyronese maids with tokens of kindred affection.

After a responsive mediation with arms and lips, in grateful
acknowledgment for the service rendered by their loving monitors, who
were self-delegated aids for dress adjustment, in preparation for
joining in the morning song of praise, they made quick dispatch, and,
unassisted by the proffered hands of the maids, accomplished their first
self-introduction into Heraclean costume.

At the conclusion of the matin salutation of praise, offered from all
the thresholds of the inhabited homes of the city and latifundium, in
which they enthusiastically joined with infantile zest, they exclaimed,
“How beautiful and neighborly kind!” Then joyfully asked, “Why, padre
carita, how did you learn to sing? Will papa learn when he comes? It
will be so nice for him and mamma to join together in the cantata viva
of morning and evening, when all is right, without a wrong, to make them
unhappy.”

After the morning meal, Lovieta and Lavoca, with Annette in special
charge, under the care of Correliana and Luocuratia, were escorted by
the Heracleans, Kyronese, and members of the corps to the gate of the
nymphatasium, and were there fondly received in the matriculating arms
of the teachers and censors, and their future associates, with such
tokens of affectionate sympathy that home longings lost their poignancy,
causing their eyes to overflow with genial joy, watering the smiles
evoked from greetings of self-forgetfulness, with the balm of affection.
Annette’s reception was one of equal warmth, but timed for the Giga
reserve of dignity conferred with the distinctions of age. Before her
entrance, she had gratefully accepted the proffered adoption of
childless Heraclean parents, so that she could look forward to the
forthcoming monthly day of visitation, with the certainty of receiving
their unselfish endearments.

In the farewell greetings were mingled the novecetas’ assurances of
their determination to merit warm approval for their improvement at the
next monthly visitation; of this all felt assured; for with other
adaptive regulations the hours of sleep were so well timed for the
requirements of healthy recuperation, that even the dream shadows of
morning liberation were curtailed of their precedental phantasmagoric
impressions of instinctive hallucination.




                             CHAPTER XXXII.


For some weeks subsequent to the arrival of Captain Greenwood, the daily
avocations of the corps were assimilated with those of the Heracleans,
if we except the erratic disposition of Dr. Baāhar, which seemed to have
become more enamored with entomological pursuits. In apology, he said,
that the great beauty and ephemeral existence of the butterfly declared
its special intention for the accomplishment of a transient purpose; and
as angels’ terrestrial visits were few and far between, he had come to
the theoretical conclusion that they were intended as relief vehicles
for their conveyance during their earthly visits. For the verification
of this theory he had increased his vigilance, with the hopes of
catching an angel napping, which would recompense his trials from the
jeers of an unbelieving world.

After the morning salutations, four hours were passed in the cultivation
of the garden allotments in the latifundium, by all except the padre,
curators, and artist, the former assisting the Kyronese in renovation in
his vocation of carpenter; the latter named preferring pastoral
occupations as more consonant with their instinctive affinities. From
nine to eleven the time was occupied in the auriculum in conversational
consultation for the exposition of Manatitlan usages, applicable for
initiatory adoption by the Giga races. Thenceforward until the noon-day
hours of meridian heat, devoted to repose in the shady colonnades, each
individual employed his or her time in rendering neighborly aid or
solace. When the shimmering heat shadows were reflected in gleams from
the falling water indicating the sun’s decline, a slight refection was
served.

From thence until evening song the time was occupied in associate
consultations contributing to amusement and projective goodwill,
embracing in scope devices for penetrating the armadillo shell of
civilized vanity and selfishness. The ever changing novelty of
thoughtful inventions suggested by these associations, were in moments
of reflection a fruitful source of wonder to the members of the corps,
from the constant increase of real enjoyment afforded, in contrast with
the vague pursuits of instinctive pleasure followed with the routine
regularity of the kitten’s pastime, by the civilized races. In the
cultivation of associate worth they derived such abiding satisfaction
from the increasing reach of happy perception, they were at times
inclined to doubt their real identity as personal actors in the delusive
scenes reflected from memory.

The self-imposed absurdities reflected from the accumulative worriments
of business pursuits, and sensual gratifications were truthfully
illustrated by Jack and Bill, in the quaint relation of their
experience; who declared that their bodies had been launched and shipped
with just sconce enough to eat, drink, scrub, chew, splice, smoke, and
reef, under the old gaff, without the flutter of a sky-sail’s worth of
thought more than what they were bid to do. “But thanks to Captain
Greenwood, we’ve been saved from a dive into Davy Jones’ locker, where
we once expected to be keelhauled in brimstone scaldings by Old Nick,
without ever being able to take a squint beyond. Homsoever, now with the
Dosch for a skipper, we’ve taken soundings, and know our bearings, so
with a clear look ahead we can see a smooth surface in the channel
without a ripple, or a scud aloft to take us aback from our portage.”

Notwithstanding the constancy of the sailor’s ruder perceptions, the
thoughts of the padre and Dr. Baāhar were often auramentally caught
revelling in past visions of instinctive indulgence, so that it became
necessary for the auramentors to remind one of his medical society,
which held its stated meetings for the correction of ethical
correspondence between its members in a beer cellar; and the other of a
condition, in which he argued with his wife the propriety of retiring
for the night with his boots on. Mr. Dow would, in like manner, be
occasionally surprised in a mood of covetous calculation in anticipation
of conferred honors and titles likely to be bestowed by potentates and
societies in reward for his persevering merit, which had led to the
discovery of the Kyronese, Heraclean, and Manatitlan races. But the
slightest lisp of his first honors obtained for the discovery of a new
species of crab, which was christened “Cancer Doweri,” restored him to a
conscious appreciation of Heraclean example. M. Hollydorf and Captain
Greenwood were proof to the lure of selfish thought.

The visit to the nymphatasium had been eventful, under the direction of
the Dosch and Doschessa, in attracting an assimilative sympathy between
Mr. Welson and a maiden teacher, Cæluiformia by name, the daughter of
the pastor Corycebæus; this, through the intercession, or mediation, of
the prætor and wife, had been matured for a surprise. The pastor had set
his house in order for the return of his daughter, and the probationary
reception of Mr. Welson. When the arrangements were perfected, the
unwitting brides-wick was greeted at the portals of his thalmia when
emerging for matin salutation, by the prætor, tribune censors, Kyronese,
and Betongese, who escorted him after the morning song of praise,
accompanied by the entire population to the pastoriza. At the portal the
happy mentor received the embrace of welcome from the pastor, and one of
equal zest in the expression of sincerity from the prospective “mother-
in-law,” who introduced the blushing Cæluiformia, radiant with
affectionate anticipations, to the arms of her betrothed.

This consummation was the signal for the waiting choir of Manito, who
made the tympanum resound with an anthem prepared for the characteristic
expression of the Scotch instinctive type. Correliana, initiated into
the proemic espousal dedication, directed the measure from Manatitlan
lead. We give a rendering of the words in translation below:—

                “From Scotia’s lock’d inlet shores,
                Rough highland crags, and sombre glens,
                Where heather glints o’er boggy fens,
                And shivering, sighs lonely plaint;
                In misty tears the lowland saint,
                Of bracken braes, that rise from moors.

                “With love, we hail the herald sage,
                Who dares disdain the bogle chain,
                Of myth-bound sects and all their train,
                Whose fenny thoughts in muirk arise,
                To obscure love’s creative skies,
                With miasmatic hate and rage.

                “All hail to his love’s perpetual vows,
                That Cæluiformia’s now espouse.”

At the close of the salutatory greeting, the parents bestowed upon the
current unity of affection, in espoused accession, their joyful
benediction, introducing them with a glad welcome to the freedom of
their household colonnades. After their installation the assemblage
dispersed to their daily avocations.

With Mr. Welson’s departure, the “quarters” of the corps seemed to have
lost its active principle of vitality, and its members were to be seen
in daily attendance at the house of Corycebæus, after the morning
salutations. Indeed, the transfer was so complete that the tympano-
microscope followed in train, from the proposed consent of all, the
Dosch remarking, that in their course they followed the universal “law”
of attraction, that recognized the lead of strength, for self-control,
as the predominating source of power for the control of others. This
axiom you will find amply verified in all the motor relations of animate
and inanimate matter, as well as in all the votive enactments of life.
The sun, as the supreme source of effulgence and heat, attracts the
lesser luminaries within the pale of its orbit, and as the revivifying
source of vitality, force, and motion, it receives from instinct
worshipful reverence; while in mundane expression, its effects are
instinctively preëminent in the attractive power of the preacher,
lecturer, and democratic leader, for the control of the unthinking herd,
as the oratorical expositors of sound. In your own relations you were
controlled among your own people by precedental habits and customs,
accepting them, without a questioning thought, as well approved by the
ordeal of time. Away from your precedental theorisms, in enactment by
the controlling majority, you were attracted by the influence of
Correliana’s happy example over the Kyronese, and for the first time,
with the majority, your thoughts were directed to facts for deduction
and analytical comparison, which with the leading influence of Heraclean
example has happily called forth into active life your latent
appreciation of goodness. Following in its lead, after liberation, it
has harmonized and rendered subservient your instinctive tempers, so
that with the ascendant portion precedental argument is unknown, and
politic prudence controls the less appreciative minority, even when
opposed by the aggravations of material rebuttal. In apt illustration of
the power of self command achieved by the pastoral members of the corps,
while engaged in Olympic sports with the herd under the lead of the
pastor Corycebæus, Dr. Baāhar, the most pertinacious, politic, and
irascible imitator of antiquarian revelations among you, having unwarily
allowed his stronger passion for butterfly hunting to intrude upon the
portion of the day set apart for the entertainment of the flocks in
field gymnastics, was surprised while stooping to disengage a gaudy
victim from the meshes of his net, by a disjunctive butt, in the rear,
from the censorial horns and head of a precedental guanaco, which caused
a cycle revolution of his body. Regaining his feet, he in wrath
unthinkingly opposed himself to the sportive cause of his mishap, who
was collecting his energies with blind zeal for the renewal of his “good
old times salutation.” But with quick perception the doctor subdued his
reactive wrath, and while the sportive ram was poising his head to
follow up the advantage he had gained in reversing precedental ideas of
naturalistic progression, he wisely concluded that diplomatic discretion
would, for the occasion, be the better part of valor; acting upon the
suggestion, with bipedal advantage, he dodged instead of opposing his
body fatuistically with the adaged shield, “what has been, will be.”
Notwithstanding his “presence of mind,” shown upon this occasion, he
obstinately continued to pursue his predilection for fly catching, with
increased zeal. Often in the midst of the most alluring conversation,
devised for the reciprocation of instruction by Correliana, with a
refrain of notes from woodland songsters to the musical tones of her
voice, he would start wildly up, with his net raised “rampant” for the
catch, with his eyes absorbed for the detection of the species and order
of a butterfly attraction. When assured of rarity, he would rush forth
with eyes and net upraised for the capture of the tempting lure. Gentle
expedient, and every form of pleading inducement had been exhausted,
that could be suggested for exampled persuasion, when an incident
occurred which appeared in coincident similitude, like a conjunctive
interposition, for the cure of his malady.

On a morning which had been freshened with night showers, betokening the
approach of the winter solstice, Corycebæus led forth his flocks,
attended by all whose inclinations were not stayed with the occupations
of gardening and household employments. Conspicuous above the happy
throng, whose voices were melodious with song and mirthful repartee,
made vivacious with bantering chase, was raised the pennon net of Dr.
Baāhar. But for the contrasting halo of exuberant gladness, the bevied
groups, as they passed beneath the cinctus portal, might have been taken
for actors in some memorial scene enactment, expressive of festive
gayety in historic commemoration of ancient ceremonial rites. Nathless,
upon nearer inspection it would have been readily discovered that
instinctive pleasure, from anticipated indulgence, bore no part in the
joyous emotions that flowed in sportive current from affectionate
association. Even the pennon net, borne aloft in naturalistic ardor by
the enthusiastic fly hunter, had received its characteristic “fields” of
red, scarlet, blue, and yellow, from a peaceful Kyronese dye pot, under
the baptismal hands of the mirth loving sisters Cleorita and Oviata.
After their arrival and dispersion among the hill glades, selected for
the grazing of their flocks, Dr. Baāhar, apparently forgetful of the net
staff, supported on his shoulder, was imparting to a bevy of matrons the
secrets of vegetative propagation and fruition, when his words were
suddenly arrested by the shadow of a butterfly of large dimensions cast
by its interception of the sun’s rays upon the flower of his speech
demonstration. A glance upward, with an exclamation of enraptured
covetousness, and all his impressions and energies were concentrated for
the capture of the resplendent andean queen of butterflies. Bushing from
among his pupils, heedless of apologies, instinctive gallantry, and
masculine courtesies bestowed in deference to the weaker privileges of
the sex, he started under queenly lead down the incline of the hillock,
with eyes upturned, fixed upon the rainbow glints reflected from the
swaying waft of the andean regina’s wings, which were radiant with
cerulean tints, as if in blending to proclaim her ethereal source. Like
the ancient falconer, who with frantic gesticulation was accustomed to
wave his luring staff to attract the attention of an eyas gaffling, who
in freedom soared after striking his quarry, the doctor, with
outstretched arms, pursued the tantalizing evolutions of his intended
prize, which were sustained just beyond the reach of his net,—when, lo!
while in full career, from an opposite direction, the king appeared, and
a sudden concussion followed in quick succession, causing the doctor to
drop his net staff, and in reciprocation enclose with his arms the
object he had encountered, which, with the impulsive instinct of woman’s
self-possession in dangerous emergency, embraced with her arms his neck.
With faces in near approximation, the objects of this strange
conjunction in wondering surprise held emotional consultation; then, in
freedom from the reflection of modest embarrassment, which would have
caused sudden release, the right shoulder of the doctor became clothed
in raven tresses, intermingling with his own flowing locks, his right
arm having fallen instinctively to the waist for the support of the fair
possessor’s yielding form.

Forgetful of his net, and the vanished object of his first pursuit,
he, in “good” Germanic Latin, free from the guttural ingesta
inflection of saur-kraut, lager bier, sausage, and tobacco, offered
apologetic consolation for the shock he had unwittingly occasioned, to
which she replied in equally good English, “Pray, don’t mention it;”
while with lingering fondness, her sighs and steps were made eloquent
in responsive continuation, as he led her back in half-reclining mood
to her parents. The prætor, who had witnessed the scene with a
peculiar smile of satisfaction, explained the predisposing cause of
the encounter,—inasmuch as it was appreciable to ordinary
observation,—that it might not be thought an act of premeditation on
the part of the female respondent, or her relatives.

“Our Heraclean marriage alliance is so closely interwoven with
instinctive impression, hallowed by the unity of an affection
independent of the body, that the rupture by death of either of the
coaptive sexual individualities, leaves a void, from the material
deprivation of functional reciprocation, so desolate to the female in
its impression of lonely isolation, that instinct conjures some gentle
hallucination, to supply the broken threads of sympathy in the weftage
of the severed ties. This illusive visionary substitution is held as a
consecrated indication of continued affectionate unity, for the
survivor’s material direction in the body. Indeed, all our bereaved
experience in some form this impression, in translation to some memorial
object presented to view in the agony of instinctive disseveration.
Isolita, the daughter of our cremator, who is now reclining in the
support of Dr. Baāhar’s arm, had her attention attracted, while in the
anguish of separation, by a superb andean butterfly, which floated over
the body of her expiring husband, and with his last sigh settled for a
moment on her head with wafting wings, as if by invocation to inspire
her hopes in bereavement of a material emblematic source of
communication and direction; then, from the court colonnades, soared
directly upward until lost to view in the blending tints of ethereal
azure. This scene impressed us all with its omenic signification, so
that we could scarcely wonder that Isolita in her great sorrow received
it as a presage of vehicular translation, to be treasured as a token of
animus visitations from her departed unity in the flesh. Without doubt,
she will hold the conjunctive act you have witnessed this morning as an
intimated sign of direction for the selection of a scocius, or
companion, for the completion of her earthly term of sojourn. The
confiding trust, evinced from her retained position, already betokens
her belief in the consummated fulfillment of delegated substitution. In
like verification, you will observe that the doctor has abandoned his
net, and the winged vanity of his pursuit, for the realization of a more
happy and abiding achievement.”

In confirmation of the prætor’s prognostication, but a few moments had
been numbered with the past ere a procession had formed headed by the
cremator’s family, in hopeful conformity with the ceremonious rites they
were disposed to accord in recognition of the instinctive liberalisms of
sense which had been fostered by the doctor’s precedental education.
Being obliged to pass the scene of encounter in their passage up the
dale, the prætor’s face grew anxious as they approached the discarded
net, but assumed an expression of gladness when the doctor passed it
within the measure of a footfall, and without wincing saw it trodden
under foot by the mother of his prospective affiancee. Relieved of his
fears by the disdainful look cast upon it by the captured fly hunter,
the family group of the prætor moved downward to meet the symbolical
procession, and greet the advancing victor of self. While bestowing
their congratulations, the fanatical fatuity, inherent with the
expression of the doctor’s face, became broken and dissipated, as with
mist clouds under the genial rays of the morning sun. In answer to the
doctor’s application for the required sanction of his betrothal with
Isolita, the prætor expressed his warm approval, with the hope that he
would soon be able to derive his happiness from the prospective good his
example would confer upon future generations.

“Still,” he continued, “without a clear knowledge of Manatitlan
coöperation, in directing the wisdom of the ‘choice,’ I might have
questioned the prudent propriety of the betrothal, from your
pertinacious adherence to precedental habits, in defiance of the
constant increase of self-inflicted misery. Especially, as I have
learned from auramental source, that it has been the custom of the
Germans, practiced from time immemorial, to render their wives servitas
of convenience, rather than for the fulfillment of Creative intention,
designed for the perfection of unity. From this isolating peculiarity of
self-indulgent German instinct, it might be well for me to question,
even now, whether in thought you treasure selfish desire that would
detract by indulgence from the socius companionship of bereaved
affection. Although naturally endowed with a strong instinctive
predisposition, Isolita is in no way derelict in her full appreciation
of an affection, matured in purity, independent of the body’s functions.
Bethink you, in answering, of your deposed net?”

In reply, the doctor said, “My net has subserved its purpose, in
fulfilling its destiny of prestige; for, as you well know, I have
expressed my full belief in the especial design of the butterfly’s
vocation, from the unrivaled beauty of its embellishments, which
indicate the celestial transport, in previsemental aid of angelic
visits. This morning I have received satisfactory evidence of the fact,
and for the future have no farther object for its use; or, as we might
say in quotation, ‘sufficient for the day is the evil thereof.’ If you
can assure me of Heraclean reciprocation in the bestowal of the angelic
capture I have made this morning, I will endeavor to discard, with my
net, precedental pursuits.”

The ingenuity of the insect savan’s reply bespeaking the sanity of his
self-possession, the prætor repeated to him the peculiarities of
Isolita’s widowed hallucination.

Still himself, the doctor replied, “I feel confirmed in my impressions
of her angelic nature, from your acknowledgment of the fact, that as a
woman she harbors but one hallucination, and that I have been preferred
as an equal for association with her, a privilege which has yet afore
been awarded, in civilized society, solely, to her sex’s insatiate
unabridged vanity by the cajoleries of man.”

With this additional evidence of the doctor’s consciously sane
appreciation of the happy conjunction his morning’s encounter
“foreboded,” the espousal received general approbation. The prætor
suggesting the efficient aid Isolita would be able to confer in
systematizing his botanical labors, from the thorough knowledge of her
acquirements necessary for fruitful vegetation, they departed upon their
first united essay in botanical research, and were not seen again until
the herdsmen sounded their calls for their return to the city; they then
appeared crowned with floral decorations in overture anticipation of
united reciprocations.

Of all the returning train the padre’s face alone remained subject to
the fitful indications of thoughtful sadness. The conjurations of the
day had separated him from his last mythological hold upon instinct,
raising a happy barrier between him and the familiar conviviality of
genial gossipings in the language of talk. Returning to the desolate
quarters of the corps, after indulging freely in chirimoya and milk, he
became subject to the indigestive broodings of instinct, barren of
thoughtful resources for occupation. In this condition, disconsolate, he
paced the deserted colonnades long after Mr. Dow and the curators of
sound had retired to rest. But the Kyronese, with sympathetic
consideration for his lonely plight, busied themselves in the court and
cochina, ostensibly in preparation for the duties of the morrow, until,
with the impression that he would prefer solitude for the melancholy
nursing of his ruminations, they yielded to the drowsy influence evoked
by the approaching midnight hour; and unaccustomed to the vigil unrest
of anxiety, begot by the dismal forebodings of dread from a belief in
mythological rewards and punishments, their eyes were sealed with such
sudden surprise that little choice was permitted for the selection of
easy positions for repose. Of late, mindful of others’ comfort, he saw
these sympathetic vigilantes overcome with sleep unheeded. Even Corycæus
intermitted his thought auramentations with the solace of an occasional
nap, and with the padre still waking, and walking in a mood of
increasing nervous excitement, he at length sank into a dreamless sleep.

The darkness which gathers its deeper pall of blackness, in reversion to
the brightness in vivid glow of the dying spark, had merged from the
palpable coldness of its impression into the murky gray of the shadowy
dawn, when there came a change so sudden and peculiar in the outward
sway of the hammacas of the auramentor’s family,—suspended from the
vibrillæ of the tragus across the fossæ to the ante-tragus,—that the
forward lurch awoke the occupants. Curious to know the cause of a motion
so unusual, Corycæus hastened, with the recollection of the padre’s
condition, to take an observation, in which his wife joined with
sympathetic alacrity. They found the padre kneeling and bowing before a
rough-hewn statue of an ancient Heraclean mother, with a child, which
she supported in her arms, the while counting with a “vociferous”
whisper the beads of the rosary presented to him by Fraile Gallagato,
alternating his devotional manipulations by cross “cuts” on his forehead
and breast with his index finger. The scene was so ludicrously absurd,
in evidence of the superstitious revival of his religious instincts,
that the auramentors passed to a neighboring branch to watch his motions
and hear his prayers engendered from selfish fears, wrought by
indigestion and sleepless innervation, aided by the changes of the
night. The image had been closely veiled with a vine embossure of
iriditrope, which had been noted for its close resemblance to the
sculptured statues of the immaculate virgin, without being aware of the
model beneath. By some coincident freak, combined with fear, mist, and
muirk, confounding with the incertitude of vision-fancied resemblance,
he had discovered the statue beneath, which tended to raise his
phantasmic emotions to a pitch of fanatical devotion. Impressed with the
belief that it was a special revelation, designed as a reproof for his
“backsliding” departure from grace, and neglect of his opportunities for
the conversion of the Heracleans, he ventured to unveil the miraculous
discovery, before seeking inspiration through the celestial gates of
bead prayer. Notwithstanding the impression made upon the family of
Corycæus by the ridiculous farce, there was a weird instinctive effect
that reminded them sadly of the benighted condition of his race, who
still made themselves blindly miserable with selfish labor, to the utter
perversion of affectionate ease imparted from the current equality of
self-legislation to the Heracleans.

After an hour’s devotional exercise with hands, and mumbling prayer
dronings and enumerations, wearied nature closed the scene with sleep,
and he sank forward with his body and face prone upon the virgin bed of
vine, in dreamless oblivion. In this condition he was found, as the
ruddy beams of day began to dispel the lingering misty light of dawn, by
the mayorong, who in sad fright made the courts and colonnades resound
to his calls for assistance. Fearing that the vital spark had forever
fled from the prostrate form of the kind-hearted padre, who, in despite
of his incertitude, begot from his thoughtless reliance upon instinctive
impressions, was alike the cherished favorite of the Heracleans,
Kyronese, and Betongese, the mayorong made no effort for his
resuscitation. The shrill, wailing cry, reverberating in anguished
appeal, reached not only his own people who were preparing for morning
salutation, but the Heracleans, who hurried in the greatest
consternation to the quarters of the corps to learn the cause of the
fearful outcry. Proof to the mayorong’s mournful cry, hastening
footsteps, and exclamations of the excited throng, the padre continued
unconscious, the gathering assemblage regarding his prostrate body with
blanched faces and horror-struck gaze. When at length their surprised
emotions had subsided into thoughtful sadness, “presence of mind”
revived under the impression of regretful sympathy, which caused
Cleorita and Oviata to kneel and raise the padre’s head, and with the
assistance of their grandfather to turn him upon his back. As gentle
hands withdrew the dank hair that enshrouded his eyes, the fall of tears
upon his face brought forth a deep sigh, as if conscious of the source
from whence they came; this, with a muttered ave, was followed by a
quivering stretch for relief from the stiffness of his limbs,
significant alike of retained vitality and reviving consciousness. Then,
as if under the herald impulse of a dream of dread, he, with a spasmodic
start, suddenly raised his head from the pillowed lap of Cleorita,
bringing his nose in abrupt contact with the toe of the figure that
projected over the pediment of the statue. This brought forth, with
tears, his accustomed ejaculation, “My goodness gracious!” while he
administered to it extreme unction with the soothing touch of his hand.
The grimaced accompaniment, in revulsion, brought forth, in contrast
from the depth of sadness, an irresistible outburst of laughter, from
the late mourners whose eyes were yet moist with the tears of sorrow.

Starting up, amazed at his own unaccountable position, and the
assemblage of faces that bestowed upon him their gaze, with mingled
expressions of grief and mirth, the padre’s fingers sought his hair for
the disentanglement of his bewildered impressions. Failing in his
attempt to recall the causeful events, his looks appealed to Cleorita
and Oviata, whose eyes were glistening with gladness through their misty
veil of tears, like the sun’s rays through the cilium of rosebuds
sparkling with dew drops; but the anxious inquiries of new arrivals
diverted explanation from them. Evil tidings are ever quick in spreading
when borne by the scandalous impulse of gossiping tongues intent upon
marvelous impression, but with sad sympathy the alarm had spread from
portal to portal, with tongueless celerity, heralding the source of
affectionate bereavement.

Among the nearest, and earliest to be apprised of the padre’s supposed
demise, was a young widow named Madonnasta, who resided with her parents
without the oppidum gate, in the racept of the latifundium. Her husband
had been taken by the savage besiegers when returning from a forage
sortie; their hatred against the whites had been embittered by cruelties
practiced for intimidation while the Jesuits were endeavoring to found
missions among them for subjective utilization and the ruling advance of
instinctive religion and civilization. In woful ignorance, they
accredited their civilized foes with a united faith in a common form of
worship, designed for the immolation of all unbelievers. Prompted by
revengeful defiance, the unfortunate captive had been stretched and
bound to a cross, the sacrificial emblem of Christian faith; and in that
condition had been suspended over the brink of the precipice, in view of
the besieged, who were forced to witness his agonized struggles, under
the scorching heat of the sun, increased by the absorption and
reflection of the basaltic rock, aggravated by the pain of his bonds,
and the gnawings of hunger and thirst; but not without witnessing the
desperate sallies made by sympathy for his rescue, in which with a
wife’s devotion Madonnasta had engaged. When at length death relieved
his mortal torments, and the vultures, with time and the elements, had
severed the cords that bound the bleached skeleton to the crucial
framework, and it to the precipice, it fell to a resting place beneath;
then a successful sortie was made for their recovery, and they were
cremated with the wood of crucifixion; but a portion was retained by the
widowed wife, who with great care and ingenuity formed it into an
emblematic cross, corresponding in memorial form with the one upon which
her husband had suffered; this she suspended from her neck, as an
instinctive memento of the sad scene of her mortal bereavement. Her
devotion to the relic soon imparted to sorrowing emotions the hallucid
impression that the crossed pieces of wood were enacting the part of a
spiritualized medium of communication with the animus of her departed
husband, and were consulted at certain hours of the day for direction.
As the hallowed memories clustered around the waking hours of the
morning, when from repose the grateful impressions of thanksgiving had
been revived for affectionate reciprocation, she was ever the first in
readiness for the orison hour of morning greeting. In these moods, the
fervor evinced by her reverential endearments plainly indicated the
instinctive lapse of her faith into the implied belief of material
transubstantiation eucharistic for imparting the hallucination of actual
presence for the renewal of connubial felicity. These impressions, which
from their sincerity involved consolation, in no wise impaired the
sanity of her thoughts and acts in matters pertaining to the rational
employments of her bodily existence in purity of intention. On the
contrary, it strengthened the outflowing tide of her affection, so that
its tangibility was imparted with a perceptible thrill from touch,
voice, and presence, to all within the sway of purity and goodness.

It was the good fortune of the padre, on the morning succeeding to that
of his first Heraclean advent, while yet subject to the relict baneful
effects of whiskey, tobacco, and their habitual hereditaments of
impurity, to be attracted by the beneficent fervor of the widowed
Madonnasta’s pitying glances of sympathy, while passing the portals of
her father’s house. The effect of these interviewing glances became
immediately reformatory, for he sought a retired spot, where he
“devoted” himself for an hour to the rapid chewing of his remaining
tobacco,—supplied from the limited store of his friend the doctor, for a
stipulated butterfly consideration,—the while ruminating upon the
incomparable charms of his inconuistic discovery. After fully expressing
its narcotic power to the offaled dregs, he, in the vernacular phrase of
instinct, incontinently swore off, while from a fountain in the
crematium he thoroughly abluted his mouth; then returning past the house
of Madonnasta, he paid her his reverence free from the actual impression
of defilement. Afterwards, whenever he contemplated a visit to the
predisposed object of his adoration, he subjected his mouth to a
thorough purification with the chloride of lime, recommended by his
“friend” as an excellent deodorizer for the correction of effluviums.
This politic course partook of in advisorial advocacy, and exampled
acceptance, the ostrich’s fatuity, who in closing or concealing the eyes
to self-reflection “supposes” its material body is rendered invisible to
others. With the passage of time and his reproof pilgrimage to Amelcoy,
he gradually became impressed with the mishaps attendant upon self-
indulgence, and under the direction of goodwill he had obtained with her
greetings manifestations of affectionate approval, which inclined her to
study his language with rapid achievement and understanding success.
These inter-allusions will afford the reader an understanding impression
of antecedent and subsequent passages, elicited from the eventful
singularities of the morning’s transpositions.

When the padre’s forlorn or dead estate was announced by the mournful
cadences of the mayorong’s call, Madonnasta was among the first of her
people who had flown upon the wings of sympathy, to realize with her own
eyes the truth of the startling rumor that knelled the second
bereavement of her hopes.

The padre, at the moment of her approach, was endeavoring, with his
right hand in his hair, to establish an equilibrium for the use of
reflective thought, while his eyes wandered from face to face in search
for the cause of their congregated anxiety, manifested in his behalf.
Observing the roseate flush of gladness that quickly succeeded the
pallor of dread anticipation in Madonnasta’s face, when she found that
he still lived, the padre essayed to address her in his own language,
but upon the instant of his first articulation she caught sight of the
cross dangling from his neck suspended by its chain of beads. Suddenly
raising her hands in the clasped attitude of thankful surprise, she
uttered the exclamation, “Al han espousita directicio!” (It is by thy
fond direction!) and springing forward fondly clasped his neck in a
joyfully conscious swoon. This episode proved fortunate, else she would
have discovered his great trepidation and lack of glad reciprocation,
which would have sadly chilled the realization of her transubstantial
vision of predilected reunion dedicated for enactment through the
padre’s substituted mortality. With his usual tardy perception, dulled
from the renewal of superstitious impression, he gave only mechanical
support to the form of Madonnasta, resplendent with the charms premised
from prospective reduplication in the body.

Cleorita observing his perplexity and evident abashment, pointed to the
cross of Madonnasta, and his own, then with eucharistical fervor he
bestowed upon her lips a baptismal kiss, while with a blush of shame he
concealed the pendent emblem, suspended from his own neck, beneath his
vest. This devotional exercise and symbol, recalled to his memory the
events of the night, with a circumstantial impression that Madonnasta
had by miraculous interposition been converted to the Christian faith,
which led him to exclaim with enthusiastic ardor, “Upon my conscience’
sake, it’s a miracle, how she has kept the faith among pagans!” With
pity and admiration, he again administered the baptismal rite of
instinctive communion, which served to revive the lapsed faculties of
his incumbent burthen. As his somewhat tardy tenderness revived the
waiting perceptions of his angelic godsend herald, sighs, like the
rustling flutter of leaves stirred in the stillness of noon-day by the
advance of a shower, betokened the restoration of vital energy, with the
genial accompaniment of joyful tears. When at length the rosy eyelids of
Madonnasta began with trembling vibrations to unfold, the padre’s
features in waiting expectation flickered with the _ignis-fatuus_
expression of catholic zeal, in the full belief of miraculous
intervention for the preservation of the ordinances of revealed religion
under the fructifying influence of saving grace. As with a convulsive
shudder the full orbs of Madonnasta’s wondering eyes were unveiled, and
made glorious with the expression of delegated affection, the padre’s
face became illuminated with the propagandic light of zealotry, causing
him to seize and bestow upon her cross an emblematic kiss of reverence.
This act fully revived the pervading strength of Madonnasta’s
hallucination, causing her, with a look of fond recollection, peculiar
to widowed grief, to embrace his neck, while with her lips she realized
to his fanatical zeal the confirmation of faith.

The wonderingly amused spectators of this pantomimically enacted scene
of mutual hallucination, with this act of consummation opened a passage
for Mr. Welson and the prætor, who had been attracted from the house of
Corycebæus by the hurrying excitement within the city portal. A glance
sufficed for the assurance of a provisional “wedding” crisis, and the
prætor was about to add his sanction, but the moment the padre observed
his intention, he started back objuringly in the greatest alarm,
muttering an interposing exorcism, at the same time exposing his own and
Madonnasta’s crosses as shields of protection. His impetuous array
startled the prætor with the fear that the padre was in reality
instinctively mad. But M. Hollydorf explained to his adopted father that
the padre’s disarray of thought had undoubtedly been occasioned by an
unusual conjunction of circumstances, recommending an adjournment to the
ordinarium of the corps for an investigation of facts, and a mutual
understanding, under the sanction of advisement. When convened Corycæus
related all that had transpired within the scope of his waking
knowledge, which extended through the devotional vigil of the padre. It
was easy to trace from subsequent events the source of Madonnasta’s and
the padre’s coincident delusions. She had recognized in him the
transubstantiated form preferred as a substitute by her crucified
husband, from the cross attachment to his rosary; and he, from the bias
of an instinctive Christian education, had supposed from coincident
impressions that she was a miraculous convert appealing to him for a
husband’s protection. The Dosch advised that the padre should be made
acquainted with the circumstances attending the death of Madonnasta’s
husband, and her consequent monumental delusion from the derangement of
her instinctive perceptions occasioned by affectionate solicitude. Then,
if he chose, in prospect of their incurability, to solace her with his
companionship during their allotted terms of mortal sojourn, their union
should receive Heraclean approval, upon the plea of like illusive
adaptation.

The padre was greatly abashed when the facts in plain demonstration were
confirmed by Correliana and her mother. Mr. Welson then urged him to
accept the coincidence as an omen of happy premonition. He then
gratefully received the rites of sanctioned betrothal without demurring,
after Madonnasta had been offered a like privilege of revocal by a
statement of his mythological delusions derived from the ghostly
precepts of a Christian education. Both with firm adhesion retained the
bias of first impressions, and were escorted with joyful mirth to the
house of Madonnasta’s parents, where, with parental welcome, the padre
assured the assemblage that he felt himself proof against lonely relapse
into the mythological haunts of instinct. After the padre’s betrothal
and domiciliation, Mr. Welson with the Dosch returned to the house of
Corycebæus.

While the prominent eccentricities of the last two conjunctions were the
subjects of mirthful explication, Mr. Welson abruptly addressed the
Dosch and Doschessa with an inquiry, which, like the shadow of a cloud
passing over a landscape made humorous by man’s instinctive invention,
caused gleams of joyous transition from the reflection of absurdity,
which, with authority, we are permitted to report.

_Mr. Welson._ “You have found it necessary in coupling the doctor and
padre with yoke mates, to adjust their ruling infatuations with like
characteristic hallucinations of will-o’-wisp affinity! will you now
expound to me my own, that led to the direction of my choice? For I will
frankly acknowledge, that with studied aid afforded by Cæluiformia’s
reflection, I have only been able to discover a lack of equality from my
own instinctive imperfections.”

_Dosch_ (with a joyous accompaniment of laughter). “You have an old
ritualistic proverb of more than ordinary worth, recorded among your
mythological oddities and traditional ‘saws,’ for the expression of Giga
infatuation, which we will reverse for your especial benefit in aid of
perception for the explication of the enigma you ask us to solve. The
reading your experience confirms, in quotation, should be rendered,
Sufficient for the day is the good thereof! and with us, Sufficient for
the day is the exampled proof thereof!”

Their mirthful inclinations were stayed by the entrance of the padre and
Madonnasta; the countenance of the former having reassumed the vacuity
of expression peculiar to the fanatical rule of instinctive fear and
prejudice, which in language we will allow him to express.

_Padre_ (addressing the Manatitlans). “You must know that it is not my
wish or intention to be ungrateful; but then one must have a care for
the preservation of his soul; for what is the whole world to a man if he
loses his own soul. I am certain you could not have failed to see by my
actions, all along, that I had qualms of conscience that all was not
right with me. Not that I would wish for a moment to question the
motives of Heraclean example, or ever have, for I know that in purity
it’s above my reach. But works, you know, are as nothing in the balance
with one’s soul without faith, which works wonders. Neither can I blame
you in any way, except that you reject the light, confident in your own
good works; and I greatly fear that the sources of happiness you suppose
to be real are the delusions of the devil, who goes about like a roaring
lion seeking whom he may devour. For what says Father Jaen, ‘Good works
are of no effect without saving grace administered under the seal of
confession!’ Well, after the strange marriages of Captain Greenwood, M.
Hollydorf, Jack and Bill, with the sun overhead,—which I suppose is a
pagan fashion,—and begging your pardon for expressing the truth of my
mind, were no marriages at all, being extraordinary, without the
sanction of the holy rites of the church, anointed under priestly seal,
in sign manual of registry in heaven, which prevents divorce.
(Addressing Mr. Welson.) Then you were espoused in another strange way,
which shows that there is no regular sanctified method, as there should
be. But yesterday, when Dr. Baāhar and Mrs. Isolita came together in
such an extraordinary way, my eyes were opened, and I could not sleep,
so I prayed to the virgin and her child fervently, which led to the
miraculous discovery of her image, and only begotten son, just as the
light was dawning, and while praying to her I was suddenly overcome with
a slumber so peacefully sweet and deep, that I awoke to find myself dead
in the belief of you all, at least those that saw me in that condition.
In my vision I saw angels in tears, who seemed to express sorrow for the
death of my body without the salvation of my soul by confession. Now,
perhaps I was dead, for I found Cleorita and Oviata and the mayorong and
his people and the Heracleans weeping, and felt uncomfortable in my
body, as though I had just risen. Hardly had I begun to think, and had
just bethought myself how I was overtaken, when I heard caress me
(carissima!) spoken in an imploring way, at the same time found that
Madonnasta had fainted in my arms, in an embarrassing way, which again
bewildered me, until Cleorita and Oviata pointed to our crosses; then a
light burst upon me, for I saw that she was a Christian among pagans,
miraculously interposed for my reproof and her salvation, before I had
sinned away the day of grace! All that I have said is true, and much
more, if I could recollect it, which you would have seen if you had had
faith like a grain of mustard seed. At any rate, I feel that the
immaculate virgin and her holy son are my guardian angels, and the
Manatitlans acknowledge that they are human, and depend upon good works
for happiness, which is against the fathers and Scriptures, and I
cannot, upon second thought, bring my mind to submit to your rites of
marriage, which I fear are but little better than concubinage, that
would endanger my soul and that of Madonnasta. From this you must know
how anxious I am to depart, that Madonnasta may receive the rites of
baptism and consecration for adoption into the bosom of our holy mother
church. Then, after our regular marriage, we may return to assist in
your conversion, if I am found worthy of confirmation in holy orders.”

It would be hard to express in language the mixed emotions of those of
the assemblage who understood the padre’s interpretation of his waking
visions of the morning, bred in emergence from sleep to the impressions
of reality. The face of Mr. Welson assumed an expression of humorous
admiration, seemingly gratified with the padre’s revived superstitious
simplicity, which gave encouragement to his playful disposition for
quizzing inquiry. The microscopic reflections in like manner appeared to
enjoy, for the moment, the “tutored” dismay evinced by the rambling
impressions of the padre’s rehearsal, incoherent with the precedental
intuition of faith expressed in his memory of words. Madonnasta’s face,
although apprised of the padre’s mythological delusions, “underwent” the
varied changes of curiosity, puzzled for the want of a clear
interpretation of emotions so foreign to the affectionate current of
sympathy. Mr. Welson and the Dosch were alike dreaded by the padre, when
the tenets of his religion and its instinctive incongruities, supported
by faith in impossibilities, were rendered farcical by the contradictory
absurdities of his questioned exposition of the law, prophets, and
revelation; for, with a few interrogations, they invariably made him
feel the ridiculous mist of his self-involvement. His incoherency had
been increased by the proboscidial waggish indications of Mr. Welson’s
nose, which he felt was searching for a tender point beneath the
superficial flow of his religious faith; so he mustered all the
dignified acerbity possible for repelling attacks made for the exposure
of his gullibility.

_Mr. Welson._ “You have preferred your former desire to leave Heraclea,
and propose to take Madonnasta with you for sacramental confirmation and
marriage. After the explanation you have heard of the cause that led her
to adopt the memorial emblem, would it not be well to question her
farther, that you may learn whether her disposition inclines her to the
course you propose?”

_Padre._ “You know very well, Mr. Welson, that I cannot speak the Latin
language, neither can she understand the English sufficiently well for
the full comprehension of my wish. But what is there under the sun more
evident than the common language of the cross, commemorative of our
Saviour’s crucifixion? Why, my goodness gracious, man, can’t you see
that its use in her husband’s death, was the inscrutable means used for
her conversion? Then what led me to discover the virgin and her
child,—which you had passed hundreds of times without noticing,—when I
was in the greatest need for their intercession from the want of sleep?
I know that you say it is the statue of an ancient mother of the
household, reverenced for her “virtues,” but this, as you well know,
would not account for the effect produced on me, when my prayers were
directly supplicating repose?”

_Mr. Welson._ “Our faces undoubtedly show what we cannot deny. But our
smiles are not provoked by a scoffing disposition; on the contrary they
are more inclined to sadness than derision, for it is hard for us to
conceive the incomprehensible nature of an obstinacy so void in
perceptive appreciation, although by the reflection it forces upon
memory the perverse insensibility and difference of our past lives to
the true source of happiness. That you, of us all the most highly
endowed with the natural manifestations of goodness, should prove so
dull as not to realize the source from which the happiness you really
feel is derived, bespeaks an infatuation that exceeds the measure of our
comprehension. But as you have determined to leave us, it is proper for
you to understand the true interpretation of your betrothed’s feelings
in prospect of her removal from home.”

_Dosch._ “Before she is questioned, I would have the padre fully
comprehend the true nature of the alliance he would assume with
Madonnasta, for she, in common with the Heracleans, has a realizing
perception of the unity still existing between herself and former
respondent in the flesh. Her true impressions, excited by the symbol in
your possession, were that your sympathies flowed in unison with hers
toward the severed reflection of her own identity, and that you were the
preferred successor chosen for the representative solace of her sojourn
in mortality. To disabuse her of this gentle hallucination, imparted
from the severed ties of instinctive association, would, if possible, be
cruel. Still if your prejudices are over strong against soothing her
partial preference in the interchange of proxied solace, it would be
better for you to depart alone. If, on the contrary, you can reciprocate
in substitution her instinctive affection, you will find her a constant
source of happiness, that will advance your perception to an earthly
realization of the joys imparted from a foretaste of immortality,
through the current reciprocation of goodness. Now that my wife has
explained to her your multiplied delusions, founded upon the sounding
words, faith and saving grace, with their attendant instinctive
inducements for the patronage of gross indulgences, I will state to her
the motives of your intention which prompt you to leave Heraclea, also
your desire to have her body undergo the ritualistic manipulations of
the priests of your sect, for the salvation of its instinctive soul, and
recommend that you bestow upon her during the relation your regardful
attention.”

Madonnasta, during the recital, devoted her attention to the close study
of the padre’s personal peculiarities, which were described to her as a
prevailing index of corrupting effect with the Giga civilized races.
With the mention of tobacco and distilled liquors, that could not be
disguised to his ear, his face assumed the scarlet hue of shame, while
with downcast eyes and tremulous folding of hands, he pleaded in thought
parental example and the encouragement afforded by priestly absolution.
Quick to appreciate his regretful sufferings, she was attracted to his
side, and with the soothing action of her hands imparted sympathy for
his self-inflicted misery. Shamefaced from the constantly recurring
examples of his heedless lack of purpose, he made no attempt to renew
his promises of constancy, but remained silently submissive to the
reprehensive admonition of the Dosch. “If,” continued the Dosch, “you
and your race would give heed to the warning impressions of your bodily
functions when oppressed, your perceptions from memory would soon act as
a guard against incompatibles and excess. Functional experience as an
example for good and evil, in provisional guard for the welfare of
digestion and healthy assimilation, is better by far than the
theoretical tests of chemical analysis and the empirical counter-actives
of the doctor, which only serve to exhaust vitality, distempering in the
process protective mental power designed for the corresponding
elimination of instinctive purity and goodness. Our bodily perfection,
which ignores in age the artificial aids of plaster and paint, for the
concealment of living depreciation from unnatural causes, has been
attained by the thoughtful provision of ancestral example, which
constantly held in view, with themselves, their responsibility to future
generations, with reactive profit to their own happy correspondence with
material self. It should appear, from the example of your last
experience, which has rendered you phantasmally mad, that judgment
should be trained individually and collectively to recognize in
representation the adaptability of food in quality and quantity for
healthy support. The cherimoyer as a fruit, and milk as a vegetable
production from animal elaboration, are each separately, with a
recognition of time and quantity, well adapted for the nutriment of the
human body. But you, as with your race, have paid the penalty of
heedlessness, and in relative degrees can realize from self-experience
the origin of war, gospel, law, and medicine, with their legions of
phantasmal abettors, which renders life a waking nightmare of miserable
variations in opposition to happy realization. In the calm quiet of
Heraclean life, with associate correspondence in purity and goodness,
your impressions and desires have been so occupied with happy realities,
that even in reflection, from memory, the gala day celebrations that
attracted your instinctive passions of sense with evanescent beguilement
have proved an aversion to thought. Picture in impression your emotions,
if in the distance you can imagine a scene so abhorrent to the
realizations of affection, you saw a procession passing up the now
peaceful avenue of the latifundium, heralded with deafening shouts,
cannon, Chinese crackers, bombas, the clangor of cymbals, obstreperous
shrillness of fifes, screechings, groanings, and dronings of bagpipes,
the monotonous boom and clattering roll of drums, a procession with
banners borne by soldiers in the popinjay “uniforms,” glittering swords,
bayonets, and like paraphernalia of vanity and death! Or the horror that
would suffocate your tender hopes inspired for the increasing purity and
goodness of future generations, if the temple schools of germination
should be usurped to give place to the stable ritualisms of priestly
compostors! When, with the study of your personal requirements, you seek
to make your habits inoffensive and agreeable to purity and goodness,
you will be able to avoid the humiliating impressions evoked by your
morning’s exposure, which were solely attributable to a heedless lack of
attention to your former experience and advice of Anticipator, who
warned you of the effects you provoked. From the effect produced upon
your involuntary powers from indigestion, you can judge of the living
nightmare freaks of insanity which have been provoked from ages of
conceptive indulgence to give birth to hallucinations of your present
progressive civilizations. Once entered upon the realities of self-
legislation, in its current form of affectionate solicitation for the
welfare of others, the germ of goodness will expand for reciprocation,
until in revivication it embraces not only the human race, but in
instinctive effect and degree the lower orders of animality.”

The padre feeling the justness of the direction, and kindly sympathy
manifested by the Manatitlans and Heracleans, could not withhold his
eyes from giving misty manifestation of emotional appreciation. This
“weakness” caused Dr. Baāhar, who had with politic diplomacy conformed,
in outward appearance, to Heraclean usage, to become cynically provoked,
openly urging that his childish tears accounted for his mistaking the
rough-hewn Heraclean statues for the Christian prototypes of his creed.
Notwithstanding the padre’s regretful humiliations, from a lack of
thoughtful consideration, he could not withhold a retortful reminder
from his old noli me tangere opponent, of his more flagrant assumption;
after a moment’s hesitation, he replied, “I claim but a limited
knowledge in genealogical matters pertaining to mythology, but I think I
was not more daft in my judgment when I mistook the statue in the misty
morning light, for the virgin mother and child, than you was in judging
the Heracleans politic worshipers of one of your old Sclavo-vendic
deities, because you found a statue garlanded with vine-disguised
Kyronese mousetraps.”

This ever ready repartee, and apt for the occasion, served to dispel the
reproachful shadows, that in impression hung over the padre from his
listless predisposition to lapse into his old fatuous rulings of
instinct. The admonitions of the Dosch had also aroused in him a
reproachful fear that his example would serve to impair the confidence
of new arrivals in the effective permanency of Heraclean example; which
awakened in him a determination in his own mind “to make his calling and
election sure,” by a thoughtful avoidance of precedental inclinations.




                            CHAPTER XXXIII.


Dr. Baāhar, acting in accordance with the suggestion of the Dosch, given
a few months previous, had devoted his attention to the cultivation of
fruit-bearing plants, shrubs, and trees, but his success from a lack of
objective constancy and discriminative judgment, was inclined to be
enigmatical in practical results. Instead of studying the practical
adaptation of productive vegetation for the requirements of healthful
subsistence, he was quite content with transplanting rare growths,
obtained from the surrounding country in the latifundium, without
anxious regard for the development of fruitful utility, often
introducing those that it had required the labor of years to
exterminate, when sowed upon the wind from the brink of the precipice by
the Indian besiegers. Fortunately his democratic ideas, which reverenced
the rights of naturalization in freedom from adaptability, and rapid
succession in office, gave his citizen plants but little time to take
root, except those of the most worthless description that live upon the
blight of the fruitfully good. Yet with all his inadvertencies, accident
occasionally favored a useful result, as many of the fugitive growths
which had in seed-flight adapted themselves to congenial soil proclaimed
their transatlantic origin and capability for life sustaining
reproduction with provident forethought in cultivation. His botanical
ambition found ample satisfaction in tracing their genealogical
relationship without testing their fruitful capacity, except in
chimerical conjecture, founded upon precedental arguments advanced by
the most ancient writers.

Under the affectionate tuition of necessity, Isolita’s instincts had
been trained for the consistent conservation and advancement of
vitality, and her knowledge, despite the disadvantages of siege, had
extended with a wide reach beyond the cinctus walls. With cultivated
attainments for the discernment of cause and effect, she had with the
dependent emergency of her people upon a continued supply of vegetable
products become a practical botanist, capable of tracing at sight the
natural life-sustaining affinities of fruits and roots, although
ignorant of their technical classification into generas, orders, and
species. Visiting the embryotic garden of the doctor, shortly after
their espousal, she was surprised to find the only thriving plant the
noxious venoseminata, the evil genius of fruitful vegetation, which when
once allowed to take root, in new soil, offered hydra resistance to the
efforts bestowed for its eradication. With her quick perception she
discovered the danger incurred from its heedless cultivation, not only
to the plot of her adopted Socius, but to the neighboring plantations,
which with full exampled growth would become subject to its contagious
encroachments. Quick in preservative action she seized a dibble, and
before the technical precedentalist could arrest her practical
intention, the malignant parasite was uprooted, and hung dependent from
the branch of a tree exposed to the full rays of the sun. Too late for
expostulation, the theorist stood aghast at her audacity, but kept
silence lest from her skillful use of the dibble she should trace the
noxious thrift of the plant to his jesuitical cultivation, despite the
warnings of his neighbors. Recovering, when he saw her raise plant after
plant, consigning them to the same fate, and in process exposing others
to remove from their roots the fatal tentacles, he remonstrated; but she
still continued her labor, the while congratulating him when she
discovered that none of the diffusia had trespassed beyond his limits.
At length convinced that no stray fibre remained, she carefully gathered
every leaf, branch, and tendril to be united in the fate of the parent
stalk. Completing her search for the garroting quirls of the
venoseminata, that strangulated above the surface with an effect as
deadly as the wide spreading roots beneath the surface, she silently
replaced those promising fruition worthy of cultivation, then standing
in a smilingly questioning attitude of graceful solicitation, she waited
to learn the measure of her Socius’ approval. To which he answered in
words, with eyes fitfully glancing askance, half with shame, inwrought
with furtive displeasure, “To be sure I understood the nature of the
plant, but I wished for the others to grow in company with it, that they
might improve upon its evil example, in vindication of our theatrical
enactments which portray sensational evil, that they may show the shadow
of a surviving moral, for it is the duty of the good to shame the evil;
for what says one of your old Roman poets?

            “‘In evil company you should ever show,
            That purity can protect itself, and ever grow.’”

_Isolita._ “But did you not see that it was destroying all within its
reach?”

_Socius._ “But as in war, evil eventually exhausts itself; and by
furnishing more hardy growths I should have overcome it in time.”

_Isolita._ “But it would have soon extended itself beyond your limits.
Besides, of what avail the cultivation of your ground if your useful
plants were condemned to be constantly devoured by this parasite without
reaching fruition. In permitting evil to grow and expand under your hand
for neighborly infliction, when in the beginning you have the power of
suppressing it at ease, to perfect extinction, would make you miserably
culpable as an abettor.”

_Socius._ “But your Manatitlan advisers advocate the practical good of
their school of hypocrisy, that their scholars may be fore-armed by
being forewarned.”

_Isolita._ “Yes, but the professors are as harmless for evil and injury
as those that I have hung in the sun to endure the scorching noon-day
heat, with the fruitful soil beyond their reach. Besides the human
venoseminatas serve as a warning to their kind, and in their
professorial speciality of ingratitude are detained from propagating
their deadly example.”

_Socius._ “But your Manatitlan advisers advocate the practical good that
comes from exposing hypocrisy; and their arguments sustained by example,
are equivalent to preaching, and our theatrical entertainments founded
upon precedental enactments, which appears to be a distinction without a
difference in reality.”

_Isolita._ “As you are aware, the Manatitlan school of hypocrisy was an
ulterior resort, forced upon them by the ritualistic duplicity of their
Mouthpat neighbors; which, aside from the beneficial result derived from
exposing the deceptive incongruities that entailed constantly increasing
misery upon the races of mankind, afforded thoughtful stimulus to the
graduating novices for suggesting the means of auramental direction, in
their aural correspondence with the civilized Giga races.”

_Socius._ “You are speaking as a Manatitlan, under direction. Is it well
for you to submit to the prompting of third parties in your intercourse
with me? I have been taught that the marriage alliance should be held
sacred as a body corporate united in its parts for communion with self.”

_Isolita._ “If we consult our mutual advantage, it is not from extending
injury but help to others, and with the flow of recurrent reciprocation,
we in turn are filled to overflowing with grateful emotions of joy. We
certainly should not disdain good instruction from any source, which
offers experienced advantage for aiding our endeavors in perfecting the
attainment of a happy union. As with us of Heraclean lineage, you have
acknowledged the near approach of the Manatitlans to happy perfection,
and should unite with us in grateful expressions of joy that they are
pleased to devote their experience for our advancement in happiness.
Their exampled experience in goodly purity, revived in current
reciprocation from disembodied affection, affords us a more perfect
realization of Creative intention, through the indications of perceptive
endowment. If we live dependent upon the vitality of others, without
reciprocation, to the exclusion of confidence imparted from the joyous
trust of unselfish goodness, we should in fact enact the part of the
venoseminata that destroys useful vegetation with the growth of its own
grasping evil propensities, which yields to itself a destructive
existence in compensation for the injury it inflicts upon the fruitful
beneficence of its neighbors.”

_Socius._ “Your language betrays the Manatitlan philosopher, rather than
the wife; who according to our creed should obey her husband in all
things. We have a proverb in Germany, that says ‘Two literary
philosophers can never agree in a common household;’ and another that
reads, ‘It is better to have a wife submissively weak in intellect, than
strong in mind.’ So you will perceive that in sequence it logically
follows that children born from united strength will become heterodox to
ancestral faith, unless left early to the example and correction of a
surviving parent.”

_Isolita._ “With the indwelling sanction of purity and goodness, we
accord to the Manatitlans a better interpretation of Creative
indications from practical knowledge, and are grateful for their aid
prompted by well tested experience devoted to an enduring perception of
our immortal privilege of living in life away from the gross control of
instinctive desires, which in confluence with united parental example
lives ever with us proof to bereavement.”

_Socius._ “I certainly wish to understand you, and better still, I would
have you comprehend me without other aid than I am able to impart. For
as I have been taught, it is esteemed absolutely necessary for a wife to
reverence her husband as a director from acknowledged superiority, with
a submissive affection contentfully obedient in affording a guarantee
for the peaceful assurance of the household. Law and order, under the
ruling control of the husband, are as essential for the preservation of
domestic discipline as public.”

_Isolita_ (smiling sadly). “Can union abide with the superiority of one
part above another, that with assumption dictates subserviency in the
place of equality? To love, with us, is to be loved; and, as you have
experienced, we have no jarring discords from selfish indulgence, for in
recognition of the unprivileged specialities of brute instinct, in
contradistinction we are enabled to consult the body’s requirements for
healthy support, in appropriate degree for the healthy manifestation of
affectionate equality, in check of the cravings for excessive
gratification that with material clog is the pampering source of all the
woes of the Giga race.”

_Socius._ “So, so, I see that a Heraclean wife includes the dictation of
a Manatitlan bride.”

_Isolita._ “It is not our wish to ‘dictate or argue,’ for we have been
well informed of the dissentious meaning of the words in exampled use
with the Gigas. But you must be well aware, that unless confidingly
united in sympathy our union is void, and our example would impart evil
rather than good. It is from the consciousness of grateful appreciation
derived from imparted affection that we obtain our impressions of
happiness, and in extension of immortality.”

_Socius_ (abashed). “You make me feel from your affectionate
solicitation, in self-reproof, for my repellance, like a father who has
dictated to his children, by recommendation and example, politic
hypocrisy, sword exercise, and dancing, as passports for the enjoyment
of life, with the expectation of affectionate reciprocation; but will
honestly acknowledge that the prepossessions of my instinct oppose
concessions; still will try to make myself subservient to your
affectionate direction in all things, for I am fully impressed with the
fallacious follies incubated from my conceptions.”

_Isolita._ “It is not my desire’s wish to have you subservient in any
respect, but affectionate in the reciprocation of purity and goodness,
so that our companionship may never admit of selfish deviation, but
experience in daily appraisement the novelty of new ardor in loving
returns.”

The voice of the padre, tremulous with mirthful enjoyment, interrupted
the doctor’s grateful reply to Isolita, by calling upon him to act as
umpire in deciding a question that had arisen between him and Madonnasta
with regard to the germination of the bean. In answer to his call the
doctor and Isolita advanced to his plot, where they joined in the
voiceful mirth of Madonnasta, who had surprised her espoused while
engaged in reversing the supposed resurrection of some Indian beans he
had planted, which in germination had been forced in division above the
surface. The first salutation of Madonnasta, when she discovered his
unnatural occupation, was a look of startled inquiry directed to his
face, to detect whether his employment was prompted by humorous
suggestion from the delusive effects of his Christian education, which
inculcated a material resurrection of the interred body, or simplicity.
His pantomimic expression of disgust, at the supposed trifling of
vegetation in returning to him his labors in material bifurcation, put
to flight her first impressions that he was facetiously endeavoring to
show his willingness to uproot old prejudices founded upon precedental
habits and customs. His ludicrously despiteful gesticulations, evoked
from nature’s supposed practical joke, quickly dispelled her shudder of
dread by making apparent the real cause of the reversion. The simplicity
of his ignorance caused a depreciating flow of mirth, as she stayed his
hands from farther sacrilege. Readily understanding from her movements
and facial indications, the cause of her remonstrance, he expostulated
with her by signs and words to respect his judgment. But unable to stem
the current of her mirthful resistance to his labors, he appealed to Dr.
Baāhar for judgment upon the cause of the bean’s bodily resurrection.
Upon learning the cause of the doctor’s summons, Isolita was unable to
resist her inclination to join in the mirthful peals of Madonnasta. But
her socius with dignified seriousness, natural to the scientific
professor, proceeded to give an elaborate opinion from authenticated
authority founded upon the technicalities of order, genera, and species,
in conjunction with a supposititious analysis of the soil; which caused
the padre to interrupt him with the exclamation, “My goodness gracious,
doctor, I called for light, and you give me darkness! The fact is we
might as well acknowledge our ignorance at once, and submit gracefully
to our betrothed’s Heraclean direction; for even your maiden aunt, upon
whom you was mainly dependent for your theoretical ideas, illustrated
the virtue of necessity in like emergency, by an example of celibacy,
and the value of our opinions tend to the same end.”

To which the doctor replied, “If you are to be made the pons asinorum
for the passage of Manatitlan wit, we had better adjourn to the
auriculum where we can have a more direct rendering.”

In response to an implied allusion to his brogue, the padre, in retort,
urged that the doctor’s name gave indication of an instinctive alliance
equally remote with his own, although more simple and less prolonged in
vocalization. These repartees, although civilized in evolution, were
void in chivalrous results, as each party held themselves amenable to
kindly goodwill in the revival of their ancient badinage in the presence
of their betrothed.




                              CONCLUSION.


Having, with advisorial aid, completed the historical part of my
delegated labor, designed for the initial elaboration of Manatitlan
habits and customs in design for Giga adoption, I am directed to urge
for any lack of perspicuity, in addition to my own defects, the limited
variety of words and terms embodied in the languages and idioms of
civilized races, for the expression of affectionate purity and goodness,
with the impress of reality, independent of the selfish distinctions
imposed by the arbitrary rule of meum and tuum. As a reflecting pharos
for the Manatitlan rays of affection, I have endeavored to render from
their dictation with truthful impartiality, rarely offering comments or
suggestions of my own. Still, I am fully aware, that, as the medium, I
shall subject myself, as a target, to the defilements of instinctive
stigmas, which so abundantly replenish in Giga vocabularies the lack of
words endowed with affectionate expression; but feel myself so well
protected by the initiatory silicoth-garment of Manatitlan adoption,
that the omniscentiferous capacity of humanity for the ejection of odors
from mouth and pen, will prove as harmless in effect as if in aim
directed to my dictators.

With the assurance of affectionate reciprocation from the good of septs
and nationalities, I shall, with the grateful solace of their sympathy,
rest content in freedom from annoyance, although assailed with odors,
grunts, and growls vented from mouthpat instinct. If, peradventure, the
future of Giga races may be withheld by the adoption of the Manatitlan
system of education, in devisement for the attainment of legislative
self-control, from thoughtless submission to the mouthed and written
precedentalisms, which have served to render misery the chief object of
life rather than happiness, it will prove an ample source of recompense
for the untoward contributions bestowed in opposition to creative
indications by progressive instinct.

Yet with all the hoped for joy anticipated from the grateful confluent
reciprocations of goodness, we acknowledge a selfish grief foreboded in
our exile from Heraclea into the civilized world of instinctive strife,
although consoled with the auramental presence of our Manatitlan
familiars.

                                          R. ELTON SMILE, _Proscriptor_.

In testimony of joyful authenticity, we the undersigned members of the
Teutonic corps of the R. H. B. Society subscribe our names in
verification of the Historiographer’s correct interpretation of the
events transpiring under our observation.

          GIGANTEO XL.,                    ADESTUS,
      _Dosch of Manatitla_.     _Prætor of Heraclea of the Falls_.

                            M. HOLLYDORF,
                                          _Director of the Corps_.

                            LEPIDOPTERUS BAĀHAR,
                                                   _Entomologist_.

                            OCTAVE PETTYNOSE,
                                          _Buzz Curator of Sound_.

                            FALSETTO LINDENHOFF,
                              _Stridential Curator and Recorder of
                                             Genealogical Sounds_.

       Honorary Addendas:   GUILLERMO WELSON,
                                                         _Mentor_.

                            DIEGO DOW,
                                                     _Naturalist_.

                            TRULY RURAL GREENWOOD,
                                              _Expeditionary Aid_.

                            PADRE SIMON,
                                   (_Under protest_) _Mythological
                                                Curator of Souls_.

                            JACK AND BILL SMITH OR JONES,
                            _Sons of Neptune, and volunteer Aids_.

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                          TRANSCRIBER’S NOTES


 1. Added CONTENTS.
 2. There was no CHAPTER numbered IV in the book. Renumbered remaining
      chapters accordingly.
 3. Changed ‘of recent’ to ‘of a recent’ on p. 187.
 4. French paragraph beginning at the bottom of p. 256 was sans accents.
 5. Changed ‘throughly dried’ to ‘thoroughly dried’ on p. 273.
 6. Changed ‘you was’ to ‘you were’ on p. 298.
 7. Silently corrected typographical errors.
 8. Retained anachronistic and non-standard spellings as printed.
 9. Enclosed italics font in _underscores_.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Manatitlans, by R. Elton Smile

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MANATITLANS ***

***** This file should be named 54733-0.txt or 54733-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/5/4/7/3/54733/

Produced by Richard Tonsing and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org



Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

